Focus Group 2
Information about the appointment
Date: 27.10.2023
Participants: TN4, TN5, TN7, TN10
TN8 unfortunately had to cancel the appointment spontaneously and will write a reflection as compensation
Transcript
GA: So, the question is, what do you see as the challenge in diabetes? Otherwise, without ever having worn a sensor. You can probably start?
TN10: No matter what type of diabetes, type 1, type 2...?
GA: Yes. Both.
TN10: And now in relation to myself or in general? Well, I mean, me of course...
GA: Generally about patients, diabetes patients. 
TN10: I think the main challenge is that diabetes is a disease that affects many people and is often asymptomatic at the beginning. That you simply have, firstly, or good screening programs to filter out or catch those who have it at an early stage. And, of course, good treatment, where the main aim is to prevent or avoid all complications. And of course, or not just drug therapy, but also trying to implement other measures and ehm, including or optimizing exercise, compliance, that you can often motivate the patients, who are not always very easy. Ehm, that they see or why you have to make a certain effort to prevent late damage. 
GA: Hmm, and the type 1, you asked earlier...?
TN10: I think type 1 is probably easier or, because these are often younger people who are diagnosed relatively acutely and who are probably more aware of what it means if you don't take it seriously. Type 2 is probably more likely, I mean, it's very much about lifestyle modification things, where people are comfortable, or. And ehm, if the doctor can do something, it's easier than if you have to do something yourself. I think that's less of a problem with type 1, from my non-diabetologist point of view.
GA: Yes.
TN7: Can I say something about that in principle, or is it a sequence? I think it really is such a discussion, isn't it?
GA: Yes, of course. It's a discussion.
TN7: So I think for type 1 or, so it's, so it's mostly younger, or and a bit more reflective, or. And ehm, it's just as difficult, probably a bit more, because they think about it a lot more. And I mean, we've all experienced what it's like now, because you can't really assess what sugar is like. Or even after eating, we've also had sugar spikes a few times, after eating spaghetti, we didn't feel any of it at all, we were just a bit shocked. and I think that somehow shows that you don't feel any of your sugar at all. And if you have type 1, and you just know how dangerous it is, depending on how much you inject, because they usually inject more than type 2 or. So I think that's...
GA: You inject less. The dose is less but more often.
TN7: Yes, but they do inject more often or. So they always have to be extremely concerned with that or what I eat or... and I think we've become a bit of experts in that respect too or during these two weeks, haven't we?
GA: I'm glad to hear that.
TN7: So you already knew a little bit. So if you eat salad, then the sugar remains relatively between six and seven. Or if you eat spaghetti or pizza, pizza is really bad, isn't it? (everyone laughs) then it goes way up. Or when you do sport, or. Well, I found that really blatant, or, I have hypos from time to time, where I get down to three or, and then I've also or, so then I've sometimes done sport and then ehm at the beginning I realized, "Oh, now it's getting a bit critical" and then you can always measure and so and then you see exactly, now the sugar goes up like this and then you know, "Okay, now the gluconeogenesis in the liver is boosted". And I think somehow that's really cool with the sensor on the one hand, but you're constantly dealing with the sugar. Even with type 1, where you don't have to increase the dose overall, but you do have to increase the interval or...it's a big challenge or. And ehm, in the past we probably didn't have the sensor, always there with the pricking, I imagine that's terrible, isn't it? Ehm and with, you actually have to be an expert on food, on food, just when you go to a restaurant, you don't know what other hidden sugars are in there, when you cook yourself you know, "okay, you can have so and so much". And with the sensor, I think it's..., you can monitor it a bit better or. So from that point of view, I couldn't say that it's totally different for one and two. They're just different groups.
GA: There are probably other challenges.
TN7: Exactly, other challenges exactly.
(TN5 arrives slightly late and sits down)
GA: TN5, we've already started, so acoustic recording. The question was, what is your general perspective on the challenges of diabetes. So without having worn a sensor before, what were your thoughts?
TN5: So what were my thoughts before?
GA: Yes.
TN5: So I'm very, well, I wondered very much how well you find out in these two weeks with the sensor, how well you get a feel for it. Because I have to say, it depends on a lot of different things how your blood sugar is, especially how hungry you are and how quickly you eat. That's what I noticed above all. And then there were a few strange peaks that I couldn't imagine or explain, like three hours later, when it suddenly went up like that again. 
GA: Hmm.
TN5: And ehm, I was particularly interested, I don't know who from this group attended this training yesterday from the eating disorder specialist. She said that type ones and type twos, especially teens, ehm, have a high risk of developing an eating disorder if they have been diagnosed with diabetes 1 young. And ehm, I can understand that now in hindsight, because you focus a lot, like "Ah, now it's shitting me, why is the sugar so high now, I haven't eaten anything that bad." And so on, and that's in the teenage years, when you have to find yourself anyway. And we all know the teenage type-ones who don't have a diagnosis of an eating disorder, who just aren't that compliant. Where we ask ourselves, "Yes, why aren't you so compliant now?" It's just really annoying when you have to deal with food all the time. And I was particularly interested in how that came out for me beforehand.
GA: Hmm, nice. TN4, with you?
TN4: So, in general...?
GA: In general, first of all outside of this study.
TN4: I believe what TN10 has already said. I also have a patient with diabetic foot syndrome who will probably need a lower leg amputation. That's now really stuck in my craw, actually as a late complication, but in this patient it's one of the first complications. I also think that many patients are not aware of what this actually means, for example the young patients you mentioned, who can lose weight by not injecting themselves, but are not at all aware of the consequences, as you mentioned earlier. And I don't think I could have imagined before what it would be like to know exactly what kind of sugar you have all the time. I was particularly interested in whether it would have an effect on my eating habits or how much sport I do or whatever. In other words, whether I let myself be influenced by the values I measure and what I eat. And whether that also stresses me out somehow when I always know: "Oh, no, now I'm going to eat pizza, now it's mega high when I measure."
GA: Hmm. Good. And, now may I ask you, what was your motivation for taking part in the study?
TN10: One motivation was to support you...
GA: Oh, thank you! That's nice now.
TN10: ...to make your work easier. And one motivation was that I wanted to try it out, how it feels, what it means. I couldn't imagine what it would feel like or what it would do to you and ehm, yes, I mean, it does something to you. I mean, you look at your phone even more, whether that's good, probably not. And ehm, (pause for thought) I was still surprised at some of the values that I measured. So what was exciting, of course, was the rise in cortisol in the morning, which was also higher with the sugar. But partly or I also had the feeling that I now have a massive hypo and it was still completely normal. And then on the other hand the counter-regulation after eating and I really almost went into a hypo, but didn't notice anything. So I think it's extremely difficult just to feel it. I didn't manage to do that, so at least what I felt wasn't what I actually felt afterwards.
GA: Did you have any problems while wearing the sensor? Was there anything where you somehow said, that bothers me now, or?
TN10: I only had to give up certain fitness exercises. That didn't bother me too much, but that's what I had to do. (all laugh)
GA: Okay, otherwise it would have come out...?
TN10: So Scots curls, exactly where you're somehow pressing on thirty or forty kilos, that didn't work. Ehm, sometimes it bothered me a bit when I was sleeping and I was always a bit scared when I was putting on and taking off my clothes: "Will I rip it off now?" or. So it was a slight restriction, but there was a certain slight restriction.
GA: And when you see yourself again as a doctor wearing a sensor without having an illness. Has somehow also helped to change perspective about the patient or to think differently about patients, what challenges might patients have to overcome in everyday life.
TN10: So the challenges and restrictions that I have had, they probably have to put up with them too. And then I thought to myself, I have to carry this for two weeks, others have to carry it for a lifetime. Unless there are further developments, which will certainly be the case. But of course that's not something fun. It's not something you do voluntarily for a long time. But I think that on the other hand, I mean the alternative to pricking several times a day, I think it's a massive improvement in the quality of life of patients. 
GA: Yes, yes. Thank you.
TN7: Well, that's what it is or, you see it too. Or so, where I've just been with you, I've been approached a lot or. Some people have no idea, even doctors or. At the infectiology congress I walked in with it and so, most infectiologists didn't know what it was or. Ehm, the ones who are a bit better internally, they came in and said: "Eh, do you have diabetes now?" And so, or, I thought that was funny, but I also spent a lot of time on the streetcar or somewhere I was, because it was summer there, or very hot, and then I always wore T-shirts where you could see it. And I was approached a lot, found it really interesting and somehow explained it and, and most of them were like ah, yes, they'd already seen it, right. And most of them have heard about it or something. So actually it was still an interesting thing, but if you're a patient and then you have to explain to everyone why you have it now and that you have diabetes and so on, or. Ehm, then it's probably not so funny, is it? And of course, then you probably start wearing stuff like that. So once I was at a gala dinner and I thought to myself: "Should I wear something that covers this?" Because otherwise yes, it looks a bit stupid and you can just see it, ehm, and I think that's probably also a point for patients in the long term, that you're approached about it or that you're somehow labeled, or.
GA: Hmm, Hmm.
TN7: Whereby...
TN5: But all of them, so if you're at the gala dinner and the alternative is that you have to prick your finger, then that's even more so, isn't it?
TN7: Yes, but if you think like that, I mean, I have to say, I've never, I've never paid that much attention when people have worn it. I have to say. So either I've never seen it or there really isn't that much or are they hiding? Because there are, well, I just didn't notice that in any other environment that people were walking around with one. And then I did a lot of reading about the sensor. There's a movement now for normal people without diabetes to wear them to lose weight, which I can totally understand. Because you can, so at the beginning it was almost like an addiction for me or, then you do it all the time, or and then: "Ah, great" and so or, or somehow: "Ah, now if I just eat the little salad, it stays mega in that range." And somehow I also think it's being pushed in the media now, or if you go and look somehow, or, maybe there's a change, that maybe everyone will be walking around with it at some point or. Like everyone is somehow taking the pill to lose weight and so on, or, but so far it hasn't actually been something that I've seen in public. And even in hospital, I have to say, it has changed a bit for me now, when someone has diabetes, or I ask: "Do you have a sensor?" Or maybe I look beforehand on the ward round and see something on their arm or that they have a sensor. But I didn't visualize that beforehand.
GA: So that means it's something that has at least changed in your consciousness? This has simply led to you actively asking about it, the patient probably has a sensor... That's easy.
TN7: Exactly, or simply say: "Look, that would be a good thing." Because sometimes I've actually had a discussion on the streetcar or something, and then they started discussing it with me, saying that they thought it would be good. And then I said, I can only recommend it, it's totally cool. Well, it was still funny, wasn't it? It's not like everyone has it yet.
GA: Fine! No, not all of them.
TN7: I kind of had the feeling that that's just what you have. But that's just not the case.
TN5: And he doesn't always get paid, does he?
GA: It is only paid under insulin therapy, but in US as you say, there is now....
TN7: Yes, it's become a huge movement there.
GA: ...there's a movement, it always comes from Silicon Valley by the way, they want to track themselves for all health parameters and become even healthier, even healthier. And that's what Levels means, let's see. There's a long waiting period, by the way, because this Levels is also similar to a sensor, but it also provides information based on previous values of blood sugar with food, so that it comes like a message: "Last time with this food the blood sugar rose so much, is it still such a good idea to eat biscuits now, or could it be something else."
(Everyone laughs and expresses their astonishment with "oh", "wow")
TN7: That's a real limitation.
TN4: I think it should be discussed whether this...
TN10: Then the location is matched and when you walk past the Mac (McDonald's), it's like: "Hey, don't go in there now!" Hahaha, so cool.
(everyone laughs even more)
TN4: But I think it goes a bit into the same discussion with the Journal Club with Ozempic or whatever, so you have to critically question whether it's clever. So I also found it really exciting for two weeks, but I can also imagine, as you (TN7) say, it triggers something in you. Like: "Hmm, yes, now I might want to keep it low. Now I'd rather eat a salad." And especially for people who are even more susceptible to this, who probably want to track themselves like this, it can somehow result in an eating disorder or whatever. So I think it's a fundamental question of how much unnecessary testing you want to do. There's no indication now for a... for me at 27 that I need a glucose sensor if I'm otherwise healthy.
GA: Yes, yes. Now a question based on the discussion. When I hear this, it was also the case in the last group that people really reflected critically, not only mentioning the advantages, but also the disadvantages. Do you see an advantage of education, that is, the patient gets the information: "Look, this is a tool that can do this and this and this, but it also has a downside." The patient receives the information and of course tries to use it sensibly and not overuse it. We call it alarm fatigue. This means that alarms can be used with the sensor. That means low alarms and high alarms, and if the patient is constantly disturbed by alarms, he doesn't do anything, but gets tired of alarms. You have to set alarms that really make sense, that you're not unnecessarily disturbed every day, that you set certain times. Because it's like a hammer, if we need a hammer but we don't need it, then it hurts us. But if we need it unnecessarily, it's also useless.
TN7: Yes, but now, these boundaries are also extremely important. I have hypos from time to time. Not as often as in previous years, because I simply know very well when they're going to happen. And during these two weeks, I've dropped to three twice. And then the alarm actually went off. And that's when I realized that it might be getting to that point again. But the problem with hypos is that you don't notice it for so long and then suddenly you're in it. And I also find that, well, it happens so quickly and it can then go in the wrong direction if you don't eat something and from that point of view, well, the alarm has already brought me something there, that I knew: "Okay, now I'm just low again, now I should eat something again or not just, I don't know, run somewhere or something." Because that's exactly what can cause it to go even lower. I think it's important to draw the line when it comes to diabetes, because it's even worse there, isn't it? And just the example of my friend, three weeks ago he was still rowing with one, and he was on the boat with two ladies. And one of them got on with the sensor and then somehow I think it was four. And then she said: "Ah, stupid," and so, "Yes, I might have to eat something small." But then she just ate quickly and certainly far too little, didn't she? And then, after three or four hours, they actually ended up in an emergency situation. And luckily she was still able to get ashore, so there was a restaurant there and the restaurant staff then, well, she wasn't able to dock there, but the restaurant staff then put something on the boat so that she could have a drink, because she simply didn't have anything with her. She didn't have anything with her. And then I thought, yes, well, that's important with the diabetes. Somehow I wasn't aware of it or, it happens so quickly and she was still physically active and then it's just not the case that gluconeogenesis is stimulated like it is with us, where you can compensate for it. What you're saying is probably good, that people should be told that they shouldn't measure every hour, but that they should be given a schedule of when it's good to measure, but that they should have alarms, or if the sugar, I don't know, goes above a certain limit, that they should then, I don't know...
GA: ... can react.
TN7: ... that you can react, right. Otherwise it's not much use, is it?
GA: Yes, you're right.
TN7: Well, that just sank in for me, the example, because they really had to, so they were in distress, so she was solvent on the boat. And the other two had to row ashore and just because they simply didn't, she was probably already in the hypo and didn't really realize the situation or...
GA: Hmm. An experience with sport that surprised you? So you expected something and it came out differently from the sensor. Was there anything else in the course of the two weeks, a sensor value, where you can't explain, where you say: "I didn't expect that now"?
TN5: In the context of sport or in general?
GA: Generally speaking, too.
TN5: So in the context of sport, it was actually as I would have expected. The fact that you can't really absorb the extreme peak, a really extreme peak like pizza, but you can absorb a full meal relatively well. But otherwise there were really two or three episodes where there was a second peak after two or three hours, which I couldn't explain exactly, even though I hadn't actually eaten anything. And ehm, it was probably somehow a change in gastric emptying or something.
GA: Hmm. So after two hours after the meal...?
TN5: Yes, so then there's a postprandial peak and then back down to six or five and a half or five and then there's a second peak two or three hours later after the meal, when I haven't actually eaten anything, which I didn't understand exactly.
GA: Yes. We see this peak in diabetes consultations with complex meals. This means that if there is a lot of protein and a lot of fat, then the body needs to process fat and protein first and glucose digestion comes later. And that is why there is a later rise in blood sugar.
TN5: Yes, I don't remember what it was, it wasn't particularly complex, but yes...
TN4: I've never really thought about it like that, but then you have like a rise in blood sugar during exercise. And I was like, so... well, it makes sense, but I was amazed that it went up at first and then afterwards you fell much lower. And then I always have this feeling, you often have this feeling during exercise: "Wow, now I'm starting to feel a bit dizzy." But your blood sugar was actually higher afterwards than before you started exercising. What I also found exciting is that I still had nights during the sensor.
TN5: What did you have?
TN4: One week of nights. (meaning night shifts) 
TN5: Ah, yes, that must have been a mega mess. 
TN4: And that's just, just, I... it was so much more jagged there than during the week where I had a regular routine.
TN5: Yes, that's been interesting for me too, especially now when I've been awake at night because of the children, it's been different to when I've slept through the night. So if I've been awake for longer, it just spikes a bit. And it's like no more... I can't really explain it, you're just awake, I haven't eaten anything, but it still fluctuates more than when you're just asleep, then it just shushes (gestures a stable horizontal line with his hand) and then at the end he comes up a bit again.
TN7: And in the evening I also noticed, maybe it has something to do with the tiredness, that it goes up really quickly, even if you don't... even if I somehow ate something small at six o'clock, so somehow before I went to train. And then it somehow caused mega spikes, where otherwise he was actually able to control it. I found that strange.
(TN4 and TN5 start talking at the same time)
TN4: I also have...
TN5: Wasn't that also a hunger phase? Well, I really noticed it when I was hungry. So I also ate there, or at the Knabenschiessen or Sechseläuten. Knabenschiessen, I didn't eat anything until three o'clock and then a bread roll and then I was nine and a half. Although I didn't eat much, I've never managed that before with just a small meal. 
(other participants grin a little and agree)
TN5: And I think that's simply because I was hungry and the stomach just pushed it on directly. And then it just rises faster. So I had the feeling that hunger was the trigger, that it increased extremely quickly.
TN7: Well, I'm not extremely hungry in the morning, but I somehow had the feeling that it's just very unstable. So very quickly somehow a bit spiky in the morning, stable and good and... maybe that's the tiredness too.
GA: Yes, that could be the case. Have you had any experience with similar meals but different blood sugar levels that surprised you? So it was the same meal, why more now...?
TN5: So I would have to go on for another three or four weeks to really be able to predict it myself.
TN10: So pizza, for example, on repeat, or it's been different. Once, when I really had a massive increase, I ate two sour sausages beforehand...
(all laugh)
TN10: ... and apparently it was just so much sugar, or that it was just...
TN5: But I also have worms once, I did some extra testing and nothing happened at all with two worms...
(the others express their surprise with "Ah, Hmm, oh")
TN4: I think ...
TN7: I don't think so with me either... I just think pizza, just...
TN5: Yes, I think that's when you're hungry.
TN10: I was probably just so hungry, or. Most likely...
TN5: I think when you're hungry, the stomach pushes it straight on, because the stomach wants to empty, doesn't it?
TN4: Really fast.
TN10: Hmm, yes. What was exciting was that I never saw a big change in sport. It's just remained really constant. But once, after a meal that wasn't excessive, it really went up a bit and then came down massively about half an hour later.
GA: Hmm. So now, based on your experience, it's very interesting, the information we get. What do you think about the fact that we, as diabetes doctors, give patients a fixed scheme: "Look, this is a scheme for insulin and just adjust your blood glucose levels like this." How good is this solution?
(pause for thought)
TN10: Not good. So because it's quite unpredictable...
GA: So you have good glucose regulation...
TN7: But I think if someone is intellectual, so there are a lot of people who are very concerned with the body and everything, then it works great. But it doesn't work for someone who somehow thinks "diabetes..." and who somehow doesn't have the same understanding. And I think you have to differentiate between the two, don't you?
GA: Yes.
TN7: And that can also be a doctor or not a doctor, or, that somehow has nothing to do with it. There are just people who check, right? And you can commission them to do it, but not everyone can. 
TN5: I think what you're getting at is that you should actually instruct a patient what they're eating and how many carbohydrates and how many other substances they have. And prescribe accordingly and not based on blood sugar levels or.
GA: So blood sugar level is probably only one piece of the whole puzzle where blood sugar causes glucose regulation. Sport, stress, how hungry he is, how much insulin was injected beforehand, how much insulin is still in the body? There are so many factors and this also makes the patient tired. In other words, as you say, the patient has to decide every time. There are so many decisions in everyday life concerning diabetes that affect the patient, where patients say: "Okay..."
TN10: That's what we see in the department, when you simply give a fixed scheme, you are, you always have ....
TN5: It's actually always off, isn't it.
TN10: ... always too low or too high. So you're never where you actually want to be.
(others agree)
TN10: So I think you really have to look at it more individually or take a lot more factors into account. I think that is certainly extremely important.
TN7: That's why the insulin pump would be best, right?
TN10: Some kind of algorithm, yes.
GA: If the patients say yes.
TN7: That would be something that is simply implanted in there (points to the upper arm), where it simply gives off automatically or. That would be the best.
GA: Yes. It still needs patient interaction, you still have to give the amount of carbohydrates, the amount of insulin, yes, and so it always needs a certain amount of interaction. Whether it's a sensor and pump, or measuring blood sugar and insulin. So that's the disease that as much as you say TN7, patient needs to be on it, patient needs to look...
TN7: Yes. But now also from your experience or. Now there's also a type 2 diabetic who has to adjust or, then it just sucks, or. I mean, he doesn't always want to calculate what he eats and deal with it and we have lots of discussions with our relatives about it. And you always explain somehow: "You know, spaghetti is carbohydrates." And so, that's just extremely difficult or. And that's probably also part of the disease or, because if someone is very sensitized to it, then maybe you can adjust the sugar better or you used to do more lifestyle things so that it didn't come to that. It's like a part that all type 2 diabetics have, I would say, and we have to live with it. And now I don't have a solution for it either, apart from a pump so that they don't have to think about it anymore. And sure, you can talk about it and all that, but it's like saying they should lose weight. Now even people without diabetes, that won't work.
TN5: But in the case of non-insulin-dependent diabetics who simply need to be adjusted nutritively, for example, or a little with Fomin, is there a sensor that you can give them to see what it does?
GA: We do that, so there's no data like that, but we do put a diagnostic sensor and motivate them to make lifestyle modifications. Because our experience is when we just blindly give them a sensor and say: "Eat the way you always eat and just observe how your blood sugar levels are and report back to us after two weeks when we evaluate them." So don't evaluate, don't judge, but say: "Interesting, what experiences have you had?" And patients come up with ideas: "Yes, I've seen that grapes aren't good. I've seen that I need to eat differently in future." These are like aha moments that the patients themselves report.
TN5: And then they pay for it themselves, don't they?
GA: Ehm, certain patients say it's worth it to me, I'll pay for it myself. Because the health insurance company says only under insulin. So it's ...
TN7: How much does it cost?
GA: Ehm, it costs around CHF 4.83 per day. So like a coffee in Station.
TN7: But now it's just a matter of showing it to someone for two weeks to try it out.
GA: You can try it out from time to time, that's right. So how often have you forgotten to scan, as we said, for 8 hours?
TN4: Yes, where I've had nights, sometimes it's just... I've gone home and gone to sleep and then woken up in the evening and not done it.
TN5: Well, I only have it when I do it at night... I sleep late. So if I have it at ten o'clock and I can scan at eight o'clock...
TN7: You do have children... (laughs)
TN5: Yes, but at night you have to put the phone as far away as possible, it has to stay dark, otherwise the children will wake up.
(all laugh)
TN5: Ehm, they go to sleep at eight o'clock, and then ehm, no then I didn't scan it at ten o'clock a few times, and then it just stopped at four o'clock in the morning and then started again at six o'clock when I got up and then you just lost two hours.
TN5: Especially towards the end, right?
(all agree)
TN5: At the beginning you are all the time and then...
TN10: For me it's mainly at the weekend, just or, if I've got up at five o'clock, then the eight hours have become longer from time to time or. 
GA: But that's so nice or that we also forget. Even if we get good instructions, it can be forgotten because other things come up in life. Now my question is potentially about the department where a diabetes patient is currently being cared for, he has a sensor, do you have the feeling of well-being, your own feeling of well-being as a doctor to care for this patient, to have a conversation with him, to check his interests, has anything changed through your own information or has it not changed much from this point of view?
TN4: I think people are perhaps a bit more understanding of this, but I think it tends to be patients who are a bit unsatisfactory for me. Because you're like, ah, you've already said so much, you have to look well and then they still don't look and then you see a lot of reports from you about the consultation and then somehow they still don't do it. I don't think that has really changed anything or. More so maybe not even with our patients, but for me, especially younger ones, who I would see now, where you understand a bit more what that means, yes. But more just in relation to the application of the freestyle and not necessarily in general.
TN7: I do have the feeling that it has changed something a bit. Well, but I generally have the feeling that everything I've experienced myself, including my operations with my knee problems and so on, has changed me a lot. That I can understand patients better and that has now been a virtual situation again, where I felt like a diabetes patient. And I already have the feeling that it has changed something. Not that I understand everything or anything, but that it's such an important part and that you always have to measure and think about what you're injecting and so on. That these are actually poor patients, so that sounds a bit stupid with the "poor" or, but it's not just that you can swallow a pill for a heart attack or an aspirin and then it's good, or. So, you know, or...
TN10: It's not that easy there either...
TN7: Yes, but you really have to keep at it every day, don't you?
TN10: Yes, yes. 
TN7: ...it's not like you can just put it aside for a day. so I think that, I realized that. 
TN10: I think there are just, for me it's a bit different. So for type 1, I have to say that I think the awareness is certainly greater. So when I see someone wearing a sensor like that, I think it could probably be something like that. And there, I have to say, I see the advantages above all that they no longer have to inject themselves all the time, or have to measure their blood sugar all the time by taking blood samples. With type 2, I have to be honest and say that it's perhaps a bit of deformation professionnel, I find it really tedious at times. Because quite honestly or, it would probably be possible to avoid a lot of these problems with a lot of lifestyle modification. And people are just comfortable and... I don't think I'm sure whether wearing a sensor like that, that's my personal opinion, without injecting insulin, would help that much. Or, because they tell themselves all the time that they know what they're eating isn't good, or if they see sugar now, I'm not sure if that will change their behavior that much. 
TN4: You didn't, or that they always have to inject themselves, we didn't deal with that during the.... So yes, you can...
TN7: So I've always thought, now I should somehow, now I should actually do a bit more or, you know. I've already thought about it, or I should think about it, or now I want to eat the pizza, or, now I know, it's getting like this, I've already thought about it. I mean, it's quite intellectual work that you always have to do. So that comes on top of it.
TN4: I think that anyway, it's always been so difficult to assess. That's what we were discussing a bit earlier, but now I've eaten something and thought, yes, that's not so... just a small, just a small waffle down there... (everyone laughs)... but that then made a much higher peak than a portion of risotto or whatever you've cooked for dinner. And I've already thought about that, so how could I have calculated that correctly? Yes, because it just never... didn't always do what I expected. So how can you really anticipate that you're going to make the right splash?
GA: Yes, interesting. Now a question, let's imagine we have an ideal world where we don't have a lack of resources and we can also supplement the training for junior doctors in that sense. So not only theory, that they learn what glucose regulation is, but they also wear a sensor. And then they start looking after patients. From your point of view, you could also go back, how would I potentially approach my patient differently now, treat them differently? And in the ideal world, how can I use the sensor to develop an understanding of the disease and, above all, to develop an understanding of the patient? Do I see a benefit from the sensor or do I see no benefit, i.e. it is not a permanent sensor, but a one-off experience?
TN7: I think another important point is what I wanted to say earlier. If you wear a sensor like this yourself and then talk in such a way that the patient naturally understands... Well, they realize that you've had this before, so you just talk differently. That also has an incredible effect on the patient. So I see it on the ward round, sometimes when I talk about my spondylodesis, I suddenly grab patients because they know that I've been through it too and so on. And I can imagine exactly the same thing happening when the diabetic realizes: "Hey, we've had this experience too, we know it." And it's not just something theoretical, then you can somehow get together as a team and perhaps make a plan. And that could have a positive effect.
TN10: Couldn't it perhaps even be counterproductive? So that the patient then thinks: "Well, wearing the sensor is one thing, but I still have to inject and you didn't have to do that!"
TN7: Then perhaps the insulin syringes should be...
TN10: You might have to do that too, yes. Or maybe inject a placebo, yes. I do believe that the understanding for someone who has to wear a sensor like this, i.e. that you perhaps have to behave a little aesthetically or a little differently as a patient. I think that's better. Would you really be able to make better therapies for patients? I don't know, I think you can empathize with patients a little better, at least in part. And you can't simulate sugar measurement or something like that in the same way as with sensor wearables. And I'm not sure whether that's the bigger burden for patients.
GA: And what is your perception of the post-injection regimen now? When patients with diabetes we always prescribe this post-injection regimen, which means that you only inject bonus insulin when the blood sugar levels are high. And if someone already has diabetes, has this somehow changed their memory as to whether the post-injection regimen has any benefit at all for diabetes patients or should they not rather cover their food properly before eating? Or is it difficult?
TN5: That's a good question, I think in the end it just comes down to... The patient is at home and you have to adjust them optimally, or now with us, the patient is there and has an acute somatic problem and then the blood sugar changes anyway. And then we simply don't want the blood sugar to be above twelve and not below five.
GA: Yes.
TN5: And from that point of view, the post-injection scheme is simply, I think, like the emergency solution for the week he's there. Of course it's not ideal and of course it's not ideal if you don't know what he's eaten and so on, we then have like a different requirement there in the department. We just want, if it's over ten and under three, it's certainly bad for infection control and everything else doesn't play such a huge role, does it? But of course it's relevant for the instructions if a patient has a blood sugar of eleven and we don't think it's that bad, he might ask himself: "Yes, should it be like that at home?" That's certainly the case.
GA: Yes, very good point. Ehm, Chiara do you have any additions or questions that interest you?
CA: No, just now, because of the transfer of self-awareness into the treatment of patients, I wanted to ask whether there can also be negative sides to the self-awareness of treating physicians, but then the discussion was already brought up. And that's all I have left at the moment.
GA: Have we forgotten something we should ask? Or is there any burning issue that has not yet been discussed? Where we can add something now.
(Silence)
TN7: So now we can delete the app? Because I've left it for now.
GA: Yes. (All laugh) App can be deleted.
(laughter)
TN7: No, I left it alone because I thought we had to hand in the minutes. I mean, that might also be interesting. Somehow, unconsciously, you might have had the feeling that you might have to hand it in. 
(Everyone laughs, participants agree)
GA: No, I said only screenshots of interesting history where we can discuss. Because the data is then no longer available in the app.
TN7: So if you don't delete it, the data is still in the app, isn't it?
GA: So we can look at that.
TN7: No.
TN4: No, I don't want that.
(All participants laughingly refuse and wave off)
GA: Of course, it depends on you whether you want to show data.
TN4: But to be honest, what I would also find an interesting study is really, even if you were to do something like this, where you look at the values of healthy people and then perhaps work more with the protocol of what you have eaten. And then you could really see how healthy test subjects react differently in some cases and perhaps apply this to them...
GA: That would be such a controlled study then, or that you really give them controlled food and create controlled conditions, okay, there's sport, food, sleep, so that you can assess the data more precisely. That's a good idea, material for the next study.
CA: But wouldn't that be exactly the feeling you've all had now: "No, I don't want to show it!" Does that help you to understand how a patient might feel when they have to go to the doctor with their values, which really aren't like that?
(Participants agree).
GA: That's a problem, but they can't hide the values from us, because we have our system where all the values are there. but we have also developed a process over time, we first look at the green values, and then we say: "Exciting, what have you done there, the values are so good?" And then they slowly realize: "Okay, the values are good, so it's not all bad." And then we go step by step: "So could we do something different?" Because the ideas have to come from the patients, because if we give them the ideas that they need to impress, the patients don't do it at all. Our experience is that patients don't want to tell us about hypos. They think it's a mistake, they couldn't manage it, so they deliberately don't tell us about hypos. We have to actively ask: "Has there been a hypo where someone had to actively help you?" If we don't ask, there will be no answer. And of course this is also extremely important for us when adjusting therapy: do we need to reduce the dose of insulin a little and tolerate the higher values? Yes or no? Because it's always a balancing act, either they're too high or they're too low, they're not always in the green zone all the time. And we don't expect that either, we only expect 70% in the green range, 30% in the... so of 30%, 5% in the lower range and 25% in the higher range. But this is also a repetitive process.
TN4: That's actually funny, because I would now be much more interested in my high values... so I would like to show my higher values much less than my lower ones. So from a doctor's point of view, it's kind of like, well, I have the feeling that high is for me so yes...
TN7: Yes, but you don't have diabetes.
TN10: Yes, exactly.
GA: Exactly, and you have glucagon and glucagon prevented...
TN4: Yes, but if I had to choose what to show now, I would rather show: "Ah yes, I've only had five to seven for a whole day like this or now, for example. It's also interesting that it's the other way around with patients. Even with patients, if I imagine I had diabetes now, I would try to keep my sugar as low as possible, i.e. in the lower range, because ultimately it's better for my outcome. That's why I find it interesting that patients see things differently.
GA: So it's psycho-diabetology. Diabetes is not a disease of glucose, it is a disease of the interaction of glucose with the person. And that's why the psychological aspects are so enormously important. And patients do what they do, the influence of the doctor is really so minimal. But the influence of the doctor, who has built up a relationship of trust with the patient, is greater. And that's why the doctor's first investment is really trust, trust, trust. And then probably just give a little hint as to whether they might consider changing. I remember a type 1 patient, a very young one in USZ, who didn't trust the sensor values and measured his blood sugar 50 times a day because he wasn't convinced that his blood sugar could be between five and seven. So he couldn't tolerate that. He was always chasing his blood sugar. So blood sugar high, he injects, blood sugar goes low, he eats. So that's a patient that has stayed with me. So certain patients put themselves under a lot of pressure and then they're not capable of giving good advice.
TN7: So that's also an important point that we often forget, that it takes an incredibly long time until the patient has confidence or. And I'll come back to my own example, but I think... Moritz, my son, also has psychological counseling and I often think somehow, what are they discussing and it's not about.... They don't even look at the problems? And she just told me again last time: "The most important thing in the next two or three years is that he has confidence." And that she has a good relationship. Because the problems with the ADHD come in puberty anyway and then the relationship has to be good and that takes an incredible amount of energy and we sometimes just forget that. I mean, our older patients aren't always the easiest and their brains aren't like that anymore, or... that they don't just see a doctor once and then it's just there. Or, it takes several visits or experiences together to be able to trust them and then do what they say. So I'm still kind of stuck in my ways and that it can also be a goal that the patient simply always comes to you and that you talk a bit about how things are going and make small changes. 
GA: That's the case.
TN7: And that you don't do big things or as long as he comes to you and has confidence.
GA: That's exactly it.
TN5: But that's when you get on your own nerves, so often when somehow patients don't go well, then I get on my own nerves or something.
GA: Hmm, yes.
TN5: And the patient is annoyed because it's not working either. But if you take it personally because the patient isn't doing well, then you're not helping him either.
GA: So it's, the patients feel when we talk like this...
TN5: If you are not satisfied.
GA: ... and we are so totally dissatisfied with our patients inside, they feel that the doctor actually already, what he says and what he feels, they find a difference or. And that's why I try to say: "I'm a bit frustrated." And I explain to them why I'm frustrated, but of course I can't change anything. What can I do, what can I easily change? And patients also appreciate that certain patients say: "Look, I need a certain amount of pressure from the doctor." Patients are also different. Certain patients either do the opposite when you put pressure on them, but certain patients need pressure. They say: "I can't discipline myself otherwise, if you don't give me pressure, then I won't change anything." In other words, you have to get a sense of what kind of patient has this illness as well as the illness itself. Because the treatment of the illness is about the patient. Without the patient, we can't treat the disease, especially diabetes. He has to deal with it himself. Thank you very much!
TN7: Please. 
TN10: Thank you too.
GA: We made it three minutes earlier. 

