Focus Group 5
Information about the appointment
Date: 15.11.2023
Participants: TN17, TN19, TN22
Transcript
GA: We are recording this for support, afterwards Chiara can also write. So before you expressed an interest in taking part in the study. What were your points of contact regarding diabetes, what changed there, the world of diabetes, what were you already aware of before?
(Someone comes into the room and then realizes that she is in the wrong room, apologizes and leaves)
GA: Someone can start.
TN17: Yes, simply by studying medicine and working.
GA: And how has the world of diabetes changed?
TN17: Through this study now?
GA: No, what is current, how do you treat diabetes nowadays, what are the technological advances.
TN17: Ah yes, monitoring has simply become a bit different, hasn't it? You can now measure blood glucose almost continuously, you have pumps, you can actually replace basal insulin with a base that is injected continuously.
GA: Yes, and have you already looked after patients?
TN17: Yes, just now on the ward yes.
GA: On ward now.
TN17: yes.
GA: By chance, a patient with a sensor is now also being cared for?
TN17: Yes.
GA: Already?
TN17: Yes.
GA: After the study or before the study?
Tn17: Even before the study, yes.
GA: What has stayed with you since before the study, what was a bit tense for you or different?
TN17: Yes, it's just still good, so... I only had one patient after the study who was so somnolent and then you could just check whether she...
GA: Ah, did she also have a sensor?
TN17: Yes, and she was in a hypo beforehand. So and then you just, you just know it without first... so we measured capillary again anyway, but...
GA: Yes, ha, to have confirmation.
TN17: ...yes, exactly. It's just a good indication of that. Yes.
GA: Okay, interesting. With you, TN22, you've got the ... You're fresh out of university and here comes TN19.
(TN19 comes in the door)
TN19: Sorry!
GA: He's a senior doctor in the emergency department. TN19 We have started and we will record audio. But it will be anonymous, so no names will be mentioned.
(TN19 takes another drink and then sits down)
GA: Does it even have apple juice or what is it?
TN19: No idea.
GA: Okay. Chiara Amstutz is a psychology student from Bern, she's also doing the hard work, transcribing all the transcripts so that we can interpret them afterwards. Ehm, TN19 we asked the question, even before the study, you have a lot of experience with diabetes patients, even before the study... What do you know about how diabetes is treated nowadays, in terms of technology and otherwise?
TN19: Well...that's a very open question...
GA: So your awareness of diabetes, yes exactly. You don't have to go into depth, but roughly speaking, if you have diabetes, what treatment options are available?
TN19: Ah, treatment options. Yes, so lifestyle, medication, oral or injections, insulin or GLP1.
GA: Yes, and the advances in technology.
TN19: I don't quite understand the question, technological advances.
GA: How much can technology help diabetes patients, what do you think is...?
TN19: Oh, so you mean the Freestyle Libre type?
GA: For example.
TN19: Yes, of course, that's great. So we also need that in an emergency, if you have a Freestyle Libre, we actually measure glucose quickly. Ehm, although sometimes you also have to correlate, I've now also learned. Yes, well...
GA: So that wasn't, you know the diabetes world anyway or. The sensor study has probably made you more aware of your own glucose regulation. Now we come to the question, what were the special experiences for you, if you could tell us during sensor wear? What was special, what was different?
TN17: Yes, I had a bit of an expectation, or that you can correlate it quite well, for example, ehm, now I don't eat anything for a long time, then my blood sugar stays low. Ehm, now I have a hunger pang, then I can also see that with the blood sugar or. But on a normal day, for example, I get up, I don't actually eat anything and then I cycle there, which is quite intense for forty minutes. And then my blood sugar always rises, which actually makes sense afterwards. Stress hormones go up or you do sport, blood sugar is delivered into the blood, so to speak. But somehow, I had it a little differently in my head at first, but then I learned from it. But I noticed it when I was on a mountain hike, for example, and I really noticed how I got into a real hunger hole. But somehow you couldn't see it in my blood sugar. I just had it in my head that these sensors are now also being sold to athletes, with the idea of perfectly matching your food intake to your sport. But somehow I don't see that you can only do that with blood sugar. And that's perhaps why I went in with the wrong expectations and learned a bit from that, or that blood sugar itself isn't the only parameter you can use to find out when you're hungry and really need food. Or ehm, yes, that you just don't realize that you burn a lot through exercise.
GA: Do you think, if it's a patient and he has a sensor, what kind of experience do you think he will have if he gets such a sensor?
TN17: So now a diabetes patient?
GA: Mhm.
TN17: Yes, well, it's a completely different expectation where you're going. Because the only goal there is to keep your blood sugar within a certain limit. And there it makes perfect sense, I'm just talking from my perspective as a healthy person. That I initially had expectations that I would look like this and that, but that didn't actually turn out to be the case.
GA: In other words, you expected your blood sugar to fluctuate more, but you were disappointed that it was actually more stable.
TN17: No, I just, I just assumed the wrong thing, so to speak.
GA: How did it go for you, TN19? 
TN19: Well, I didn't want to take part at first because I was so afraid that I would have elevated values. And then I was actually surprised that it wasn't even... actually always within the range. And I actually had the same experience. That there was very rarely a correlation with, for example, eating and then it rises. So I also had the feeling, yes, that's exactly what I had, that hunger pangs are not hypoglycemia at all. I could imagine that for a patient with diabetes this is also crucial to know, is this hypo or not hypo? Because that's the only way I've noticed that you can't assess it at all, because you can't feel it at all. You have zero feeling for what the sugar is doing, that was my surprise, that you have zero feeling for it.
GA: And you, TN22?
TN22: Yes, in the beginning I looked quite closely when I ate something to see how high it went. And also when I was exercising and I noticed that it went down relatively quickly after exercise and then peaked again afterwards, which I also found exciting. And I had a look at a Nutella roll or something and then saw how long it lasted and how quickly it went up and then back down again. And I made the same observation as the two others, that you just can't tell when you're that low or something. but I found it very exciting, but I also let it influence me, so that I ate less in between when I wasn't hungry.
GA: Aha, okay. Interesting. Were you able to fulfill the task of always scanning every eight hours or did you sometimes forget?
TN19: Yes, it was only difficult sometimes at night because I didn't want to have the phone next to the bed. And then sometimes in the morning you realized: "Ah, now I haven't had it for too long." But otherwise...
TN17: I think I managed it most of the time, or maybe once or twice during the night. If you don't hold it again in the morning, yes.
TN22: For me, that means at the weekend, when you sleep a bit longer. But during the week, actually. 
GA: Okay. And if you go to the patient perspective, how is the effort of glucose monitoring with a sensor when a patient with diabetes has to inject insulin over and over again. Is it a relief compared to old technology or does it come with its own challenges, what do you think?
TN22: Well, I have to say I found the challenges very small and I think you get used to them quickly. You don't have to think about it so much because it actually works automatically.
TN19: Well, I also thought to myself at first: "This thing will get on my nerves." And maybe on the first day I felt it a little bit, just a little bit. And then I forgot about it, so I actually always scanned it, but then I don't know, I didn't think about it anymore. When you take your clothes off, you suddenly realize it's stuck. But otherwise I imagine it's much more pleasant than... And yes, you can work much more accurately. I used to do it more than just three times a day. Well, at the beginning you do it a bit more often, but just out of curiosity from time to time. And if you have to inject insulin now, you have to do it relatively often, measuring blood glucose is more time-consuming. You then have to take material and...
GA: And pain?
TN19: Yes...
GA: So you would prefer that if a patient has to inject insulin, he would probably be better served with a sensor than with daily lancing. Unless a patient says that he really wants to have very accurate values and would therefore prefer to measure capillary.
TN19: Well, I can't understand why you would want that if you've tried the other one.
GA: Yes, there is a small proportion of patients who want this, but the majority of them want to go to the sensor.
TN19: Yes, probably yes.
TN17: I managed to get it to fall off once, even when I took off the shirt (points to his T-shirt), it got stuck once. That happened on the very first day. And then I just had to be careful, I don't know, because it was just so tight and then it was always just so tight. But otherwise I think it was a great advantage. I also have a colleague, I know him from the military, and he's a real mountain farmer. He's actually so against technology and has now had to get a cell phone because he's become a mountain guide. And now he needed a cell phone right away. And three or four years ago, he was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes, but even he now has a device like this. Just not via a cell phone, but via a device that you get with it.
GA: Yes, a reader like that.
TN17: Exactly, and he does that too... I just went hiking with him again the other day, and he does that too. But what he does, he doesn't have a pump, because he says it's somehow much easier as a mountain guide, because then you have certain days when he doesn't have to inject anything and certain days when he doesn't do much and then he just has to inject. But I think the device is also a big advantage for him.
GA: Okay, yes. Have you had any other problems with the sensor where you say, "Yes, because of that, there needs to be more improvements in this technology."?
TN17: Yes, what TN19 just mentioned. Well, I don't know, if I had to have it all the time, then I think it would always stress me out a bit that I have to scan within eight hours... especially if you want to sleep a bit longer at the weekend, that you always remember to scan. But it's probably not that important to always have a constant measurement.
GA: Well, that has already changed, there is now this third version, which measures continuously via Bluetooth itself. So that means the patient doesn't always have to hold out and that's another relief that has already happened. But it's good to try out an old technology and come up with the idea that it should have been better. And so it also happens with technology that you go from the problems to the solutions like this: "Okay, this problem should also be fixed." Do you have any other experience, because now it's easy to imagine that you all have very good glucose regulation, that the body itself strives to keep the values stable. But was there anything where you could say: "I wouldn't have learned this without this sensor." So I have something, you mentioned earlier that you expected your blood sugar to go down after exercise, but then it didn't go down, it went up in some cases and in retrospect you were able to draw that conclusion. Did you have any other experiences?
TN17: Yes, you do notice... Well, in my case I simply noticed when you drink alcohol, so a beer or something and then maybe risotto. There are certain things where I've noticed that it's gone up, especially when you drink alcohol with food.
GA: Were you able to tell whether it was beer or wine?
TN17: Yes, um, I think I only noticed it once when I was drinking beer.
GA: Mhm, because beer also has carbohydrates, so there is a difference between wine and beer. Interesting. 
TN19: I didn't even notice that now.
GA: You didn't notice anything?
TN19: No, not with the alcohol.
GA: Yes, with you TN22? You're still fresh out of medical school. Do you think it would increase interest in learning about diabetes besides just frontal lectures, that everyone gets a sensor and learns how their own glucose behaves, would it bring something, would it increase interest?
TN22: Yes, I think so. Especially with the endocrinologists, we've also had a bit of a conversation with them, so I've also sat in a conversation where they've shown a patient the device and explained a bit about how it works and so on. and then try it out for yourself, then you can really say: "It's like this and this. And for me it was like this and this." You also know what you're really giving the patient, because it's easy to test and I think it's very instructive.
GA: What do the others think? For example, we would have a lot of resources, a lot of money to optimize medical studies and also to give hands-on experience. What do you think?
TN19: Well, I think it was a really good experience for me to wear it. I mean, before I would never have thought of recommending it to a patient and now I would do it, I have to be honest. Yes.
GA: And could it also be that the patient feels better if the patient thinks: "Okay, the doctor has his own experience, even though he doesn't have diabetes, has dealt with it a bit and knows how it works"? Could that also help?
TN22: I think so, because I don't know how many thoughts other people have, but even in lectures when a doctor says: "Yes, it doesn't cause any pain", or: "It's not a problem, you don't notice it", then I always think to myself, "Yes, has he tried it?". And if someone were to tell me now: "Yes, I've tried it, it's been like this and like that." Then I would think to myself: "Okay, then it's probably not such a big deal."
GA: You briefly mentioned earlier that it's now being pushed for athletes and non-diabetes people to be able to track their own health a little like this. Like a tracking device. What are your thoughts on this, for or against? So we've had quite a few discussions over the last four rounds about the advantages and disadvantages of sensors after you've worn them on your own body, do you have a different opinion?
TN19: Well, as a general rule, I find it rather problematic. So you can try it out, I think that's actually okay for everyone, but it's actually a joke if I just keep doing it. It just wouldn't help me with anything, it's just resource-intensive and this constant measuring is just not..., so not particularly useful for anything.
TN17: I'm of the same opinion. I also have the feeling that an athlete is not helped by blood sugar alone. Even if that's what's being sold. Because in my case, I've now seen that there's actually zero correlation with a hunger hole or... For me, it's actually been more like this, when I've done intensive sport it's actually always risen and that's why I don't know. That's why, and I'm also of the same opinion, that you can drive people a bit crazy with things like that, when they always try to monitor their food, they always think: "Oh, now it's gone up so much..." But it doesn't really have any relevance. And that's why I actually see it in a negative light.
TN22: I can't imagine how that can help either.
GA: Could you imagine someone who is overweight and has diabetes or pre-diabetes and they don't know what food is good for them and what food is less good for them. Could it be more helpful for lifestyle modification to have seen at least once how the body behaves?
TN17: Yes, perhaps even more so. So I still had the feeling that you were able to correlate a bit more with the food.
GA: So then I also look at the specific population, i.e. I don't just give every healthy person a sensor and let them have a look. There has to be some kind of benefit defined beforehand, why are you doing this? For example, you have now done this as part of a study, so you have pre-defined why you are doing this. Some kind of benefit should be defined beforehand. Do I understand correctly?
TN17: And maybe if someone has prediabetes and then constantly has slightly higher values and then maybe they notice, I don't know if it's like that, but if they then go for a run for maybe half an hour or go cycling, that the values go down a bit and that if they eat more, they go up again. Maybe that could have a positive influence, but maybe more that he's seen it, or.
GA: Exactly, so no permanent treatment?
TN19: Well, exactly, I can't imagine it, I mean you have to eat, the question is what you eat. Whether you can then see that in the sugar, whether that was the wrong thing... I mean, you actually know what you can and can't eat.
GA: Yes.
TN19: I'm not one hundred percent sure whether that will work. But I don't think it's a bad experience, anyone can go through it, even an athlete, to see that it might not help.
GA: Yes, yes, that's also a statement that it doesn't help.
TN19: Well, I think students are a good idea, it's actually not that bad. Everything you've experienced yourself isn't so bad. As a rule.
GA: And if you now have a sensor, what problems can arise and what are the blood sugar levels, has it somehow had an influence on changing the patient's awareness? That you say: "Okay, I don't have diabetes, I just had to check my blood sugar levels. What are the everyday challenges for diabetes patients who actually have to inject insulin?" Could you put yourselves in that position and think about it, did Sensor bring you a little closer to the patient or was this experience less helpful in this respect?
TN22: So I think specifically for wearing the sensor yes, but all the rest no. It's just a very small part of it where you get an insight.
GA: That means that diabetes patients have a lot more to do to manage diabetes than just monitor blood sugar, yes that's a valid point.
TN22: Yes.
TN17: Yes, I think I'm of the same opinion. I mean, especially if they have to start over somehow, then they have to deal with the food intake and how much I have to inject if I eat so and so much of it. And that's probably the main part. And the sensor only helps to check whether what I have injected has actually been correct or whether I need to make some corrections.
GA: In other words, when the patients receive certain training, the sensor not only shows certain blood sugar values, but the sensor also shows what they have done with them. that is two different pieces of information, what the blood sugar is and what it was and what they have decided and done with it and then they can see the result. Can you put it like that?
TN17: Yes, so I actually mean therapy monitor then. Because it can then ultimately also determine the HbA1C via the values?
GA: Exactly. Did you see that, did you see your HbA1C after the two weeks?
(Participants nod)
GA: Good, yes. Is there any other message from you, I got the information from other participants in the last Focus Group, for example, it can go in the direction of health obsession or disease obsession, that you just constantly look at the values and then don't do anything other than just monitor and treat the values. Or it can help you to choose the right path. So it's both, it can be stressful, but it can also be helpful. It depends on what kind of patient we have wearing it. Do you have any thoughts on this?
TN19: Yes, at the beginning it was a bit like that, that you did it more, then after two weeks the effect is a bit over. Ehm, I think over time, I can't imagine that someone does it obsessively, because it's not that exciting, because it doesn't do what you might expect. The body works somehow, ehm, so I can't imagine that you'd keep doing it like that without the illness, where there's a deeper meaning to it. If I didn't feel the need now, I almost can't imagine that a healthy person would feel the need to measure it all the time. But it certainly exists.
GA: What is your opinion?
TN17: Yes, I'm actually of the same opinion. I probably also looked a bit more at the beginning. But yes, I can imagine that if you're a bit compulsive, you might be a bit surprised how you react to it and go: "What's the sugar like now that I've eaten this?" But for me, yes, I just read it off relatively quickly and didn't spend the whole time looking at what the sugar level was.
TN22: Same opinion.
GA: Okay. Did you experience any disturbance in your sleep?
TN22: More in the morning, I had a bit of muscle pain, but I didn't wake up or anything like that when I was sleeping.
GA: You have nothing... okay.
(Other participants shake their heads)
GA: Is there anything you would like to ask, Chiara?
CA: Yes, I now have the impression that you have received a bit of confirmation that the regulation is working well for you. That it calms you down a bit, almost in that sense. If you were to use it in training with students, for example, you see that as a bit of a danger, that it might be a bit in the students' heads that it works, but you can't do the transfer afterwards with diabetes patients. It doesn't work for them straight away. Could that be a danger, or do you think that with the training otherwise, with the knowledge that you otherwise have as a student, that it won't be a problem?
TN22: I don't think that will be a problem.
(Other participants agreed with TN22)
CA: Don't, okay.
TN19: I think it's more likely that you could imagine what would happen if it went up, i.e. above or below the bar. I could already imagine what it would be like if it were higher. I just think it's always like that, when you do it with students, you discover a few more diabetes. So it's always like that, if you do an ECG on everyone, you always discover something. That would annoy me a bit, wouldn't it? That also annoyed me a bit, because if I actually felt about right, I would have been annoyed if I'd had an elevated HbA1C afterwards. Because then I'd have to draw some kind of conclusion from it, and that would have really pissed me off.
GA: Okay. Have we forgotten something, is there something, a supplement to this, that would be relevant to the study? Because the study question was, what could you learn about your own glucose regulation? You told us all that. And how can wearing a sensor influence the patient's perspective?
(Silence)
GA: Did you feel addressed, did anyone ask you why you have a sensor on now? Other participants were constantly being asked by people: "Have you got diabetes now, or?"
TN19: Yes, of course. It would have been even more in the summer. I'm also, you just forget it then. I also went swimming or something. And also my family or. Yes, yes, that was actually still fun.
GA: And what did you say?
TN19: Yes, the truth.
(All laugh)
GA: That you simply take part in a study and so on. Okay. And what was the question, how did they approach you?
TN19: Ehm... Yes, so one of my sons said: "What have you got there and what is it for?" And then I explained it to him. Although the question has actually come up a lot, because in summer you see lots of people with it at the swimming pool and then the question comes up: "What do people actually have a funny thing there?" But I can't remember anything else right now. But nobody asked me about it and said: "Do you have diabetes?" Nobody has that with me now.
GA: Okay. It was the case with other participants.
TN22: Me too. I've now changed jobs to the USZ (University Hospital Zurich) with new medical students. And everyone actually asked: "Do you have type 1?" Or even during longer operations, I was asked by TOAs and anesthetists whether I had to go out and whether I had to be scanned.
GA: And how now when you take on the role of patients. You've been asked a few times, and these patients who have to wear a senor all the time and keep coming into contact with people and everyone keeps asking, what are your thoughts on this? How could a patient like that feel?
TN17: Yes, it could be a bit annoying. Because at the end of the day, it's like putting glue on your chest that you have diabetes, so to speak. 
GA: In other words, something that the patient himself does not want to perceive is constantly reminded of, not only by the illness itself, but also by other people who come into contact with it. Could that be a disadvantage of this sensor?
TN17: I think it's actually still hidden now, so to speak. So probably less so in summer and also when you go swimming. But now, when I've worn a T-shirt or something, you've only really seen it when you've done something like that. (shows how he stretches his arms up over his head as if he's trying to take something from a high shelf or something similar)
TN19: Yes, yes.
TN22: I also don't think that so many strangers simply approach you like that. I think it's just in the medical field where people are a bit inhibited about asking questions.
GA: That's right.
TN22: I just think, maybe at the beginning, that it might be a bit of a problem because it's new and you're so identifiable with it.
GA: Okay.
TN19: Well, I've also had a patient like that, a young one, who came in twice with a severe hypo. And he was so ashamed of his diabetes. I mean, there are people who are ashamed. And that's a bigger problem when you see it like that. Because you just identify them, well, it's really widespread, I would have said, and you just identify people as: "Ah, you have diabetes." I mean, if that bothers you, that's a problem.
GA: Yes. So the case, I think I've asked all the questions. Is there anything we've forgotten where you say, "Yes, that should be mentioned as well?" From your side?
(Silence, participants shake their heads)
TN22: Maybe that I had a bit of a problem with the sensor because of the atopic dermatitis, that it didn't really go into the skin. That is perhaps still the case and that the adhesive irritated the skin a little.
TN19: Irritated?
GA: Did it irritate you after all?
(TN22 nods)
TN19: I almost didn't take him away.
GA: Already? Did you have to use force...
TN19: No, no, that was fine, but then you had a ring like that.
GA: For a while.
TN19: It could no longer be washed away.
GA: But that's interesting, because normally it goes away.
TN19: Yes, it did go away, but it was really several weeks.
GA: Okay. Good, thank you very much!
