Focus Group 3
Information about the appointment
Date: 03.11.2023
Participants: TN9, TN11, TN12, TN14, TN21
Transcript
GA: The sensor is used for diabetes care. I think there are also inpatients here who wear a sensor. Did you already have some experience with the sensor before this study or was it completely new to you? Someone can start and then just keep going...
TN9: Well, I've never seen anyone. Well, I've seen it on the street but not now...
GA: Not otherwise?
(TN9 shakes his head)
GA: Okay. With you?
TN11: Well, I've seen them on the ward from time to time and I've always found it great to be able to read them out quickly. And with me as a non-diabetic, you're somehow still a bit inhibited about going to someone to be pricked and to take measurements and everything somehow anyway. It's normal for those who don't know any different. And I actually thought it was great when it happened so quickly. I never knew exactly how reliable it really was. How ehm, what you can probably do now with the several values that you have, somehow, how relevant to therapy it really is now. That also surprised me a bit, because there are simply a lot more values and a lot more data and a progression that you probably didn't have before. So you didn't see a daily profile like this.
(Telephone TN11 rings and TN11 briefly announces quietly that a meeting is taking place and will call back)
TN14: I haven't had any experience like that before.
GA: But have you ever heard of this technology?
TN14: Yes, they do introduce it in the diabetes lectures.
GA: Ah, so they're already presenting?
TN14: Yes, exactly.
GA: Okay, great. Now I come to your own experience. How did you feel during this sensor wearing period? Were there any inconveniences, anything that bothered you or where you say, yes, that was an insanely huge effort for you? So where you say you couldn't even imagine something like that?
(TN12 joins quietly and sits down)
GA: TN12, ehm, she is Chiara Amstutz, a psychology student from Bern, she is taking part and we will record everything in audio.
TN12: Ah okay. Sorry for the delay.
TN11: TN12 was too late.
(all laugh)
GA: In the qualitative evaluation, we found that one participant arrived too late.
TN9: By two minutes.
(all laugh)
GA: So yes, then. Personal experience?
TN21: Yes, I found it pretty exciting and easy. I also had the problem that I had the sensor on for one day and then it stopped working. That's why I came back and I didn't understand why it suddenly stopped working. And I have to be honest and say that I forgot about the sensor for two weeks. Because it's just so inconspicuous. Then when I was showering I was sometimes so afraid that it would come off, but in principle it didn't bother me at all over the two weeks. I was actually only ever afraid that it would come off again.
GA: Yes. And how difficult was it to hold up and scan at least three times, once every eight hours?
TN21: That was very difficult. (laughs)
GA: Already very difficult?
TN21: Yes, yes. I've always forgotten about it. I was also on night duty at the time, I was a bit out of rhythm. But yes, I did forget from time to time before going to bed. I don't know, does it report when the sugar is too high?
GA: If the values are conspicuously high, then you can set alarms and it will report this.
TN21: Yes, because otherwise I probably wouldn't have noticed. So I think it's important to pay attention to it regularly.
GA: Yes, that's strict?
TN21: Hmm.
GA: Okay. Were there any realizations for you that you say, "Yes, without wearing the sensor I wouldn't have had these?"
TN21: Yes, I just noticed, for example, when I was jogging and hadn't eaten for a really long time and then got so shaky, I could track that in the curve. I found that really exciting.
GA: Okay. What do others think?
TN9: It bothered me a bit, especially at the beginning. It bothered me a little at the beginning, then a little less in between and then at the end it really bothered me again. I really wanted to take it off, it was so itchy and I really couldn't forget it.
GA: Disturbed that you wore it, ah okay! But you still just wanted to go through with it for two weeks?
TN21: Yes, yes. Yes, it didn't bother me so much that I...(shrugs) But if I had to wear it for the rest of my life, it would probably annoy me.
GA: Okay, that's an interesting insight.
TN9: Hmm. I forgot a bit about measuring towards the end. At the beginning I was very curious and just measured every three seconds (everyone laughs). I also found it super exciting to see how it behaves. I haven't always been able to do that either, so I would still be interested to see how my sugar levels really are, I'm not entirely sure whether the measurements are really so... (pause for thought)... good or not.
GA: Yes. And what surprised you when you said you weren't sure if the measurement was really good?
TN9: Yes, so I'm sure it happened once just after dinner when I fell into the hypo. I only did that once, so it only happened to me once, but it could be a pre-diabetic sign. 
GA: But did you also have symptoms?
TN9: No, I felt fantastic! And once I was a bit hypoglycemic, but I felt great... Yes, big daily fluctuations. And when I was showering, I also had the feeling that it would have been a shame if I'd had the ten... That would really bother me a lot if I'd had it for longer. And I also don't like always having the feeling: "Now I always have to be on my phone so that the sugar somehow..."
GA: So this dependence on the device?
TN9: Yes, well, I would probably be on my phone all the time anyway, but if I know I have to, then it bothers me. 
GA: Okay, with you, TN14?
TN14: I also measured quite often at the beginning and forgot a bit at some point. But the values didn't really surprise me.
GA: And now if you put yourselves in the shoes of patients: Forgetting (to measure) happens to many? Happens to many, doesn't it? What do you think of patients, how often does this happen to them innocently and how often extra because they don't want to see the probably not so good values?
TN9: It depends on what kind of personality you have. Whether you want to control it a bit or whether you want to control everything so obsessively, it varies a bit.
GA: In other words, it's common to have different personalities in diabetes, just like in life.
TN9: Hmm, but I can imagine, I'm certainly a bad patient, poor compliance.
TN11: I still find it difficult to conclude from the blood glucose measurement, which doesn't have a direct consequence for us, whether I would be very non-compliant if I had diabetes. I think I would measure it differently if I knew: "Okay, I have to inject now and I need to know what the sugar is." Then I have the feeling that I would be more conscientious. I think it's certainly possible to forget and everything, but I have the feeling that there's a big difference. Because now it's a bit, certainly a bit interesting to observe and everything, but ehm, if I forget, it's not so bad and everything, exactly.
GA: Yes. How have you been, TN12?
TN12: So the sensor didn't bother me. Only once or twice did I think: "Oh no, I would go swimming now", but then I didn't go because I just didn't want it to fall off or something.
TN11: I did all that.
(all laugh)
TN9: and I think it was also a day early, it suddenly stopped after thirteen days. Ehm, but I didn't find it difficult at all to measure three times a day. I was measuring about thirty times a day. (everyone laughs) The sensor almost drove me a bit crazy because I just had the feeling that I had diabetes. Because somehow I never got mega low, almost never got mega low with the values. And what also worried me a lot was that in stressful situations, you could really see how my blood sugar rose. Somehow I couldn't really stop that, because seeing it was even worse. And then I always had to try to forget about it and just have the sensor. And then it usually just normalized again, but... yes, well, not so... I didn't find the study so relaxing because it just stressed me out a bit that the values were so borderline...
GA: Mainly because of your own values, which behaved differently than you expected?
TN9: Exactly, so they never hit the bottom or the top, but they tended to be a bit borderline too high for my liking, or what I would expect for myself. And I then somehow drew the conclusion that I might have to adjust my lifestyle a little. From that point of view, it might be good, but it also stressed me out a bit. So I did a lot of looking, but after jogging, especially in the morning, after eating, then somehow in the afternoon at work, so I measured a lot.
GA: You have been able to observe your own glucose regulation for at least a fortnight. And then you've probably also seen factors that have a stronger influence on blood sugar, certain factors have less of an influence. Is there anything where the sensor surprised you and you said: "Yes, I wouldn't have expected that from my studies and my knowledge of diabetes"? Or was it something where you said: "Okay, that's something that's also known."?
TN9: Gummy bears, whooop! (Gestures with his index finger straight up towards the ceiling) Through the ceiling. 
(All laugh)
TN12: That's really bad.
TN9: I didn't expect it to be so extreme, so much more than chocolate or something. So there were also differences in the chocolate, not every chocolate rose to the same extent. (laughs)
TN11: I was surprised, especially early in the morning before I got up, I had quite a few hypoglycaemic episodes. Somehow I fell to three each time and I hadn't expected to fall so low. I've always, I don't know, some people say they can feel it a bit when they're hypoglycaemic, but somehow I've never had it in the morning. And yet the sensor showed me several times that my blood sugar was a bit low. I wouldn't have expected that, especially in the morning when you still have the cortisol release and everything. That I would get so low.
GA: But as soon as you get up, the value goes up again?
TN11: Yes, I usually eat something for breakfast anyway and then it's clear that it's been up again later. But even during the day, he sometimes got that low, but that didn't surprise me like early in the morning, I wouldn't have expected that.
TN9: I once had a little, almost almost hypoglycemia after work and I didn't even notice it. I think I had eaten a snack an hour or maybe an hour and a half before, probably. And then I climbed the stairs, that's about six floors, and really before and after that I was no longer hypoglycemic. And as I said, that was a very short time, and I didn't expect that, but I've never given it a second thought. But yes, I still found that exciting. You can explain that, the stress, where sugar is released, which is then used by the muscles, but...
TN12: I was still amazed that I never, well, I really never came close to real hypoglycemia, so maybe once under four and really only briefly. And even when I didn't actually eat anything and when I did sport.
GA: And you kind of wished that you could slide down a little deeper?
(all laugh)
TN12: Right at the bottom. That somehow never happened. That amazed me.
TN21: For me it was the other way around, I somehow ate sweets and then I measured and thought: "Wow, now it's going to go really high." But somehow it never really went that high. I found that strange.
TN11: Yes, I felt the same way.
TN21: So I thought to myself: "Oh gosh, more!" And nothing happened.
GA: Oh, nothing happened later either?
TN21: Yes, not really. So not as much as I would have expected. I would have expected a higher peak somehow, but yes.
GA: How, um, do you feel good when you see diabetes patients? So is it a comfort level good when you also have to look after diabetes patients in the department, alongside all the other illnesses?
TN9: No, not good.
TN11: No.
TN9: No.
TN11: So what...
TN9: ... so in terms of medication, I find it difficult somehow.
GA: So insulin would be challenging?
TN9: Yes, I mean, I can turn it up and down, two or four units if it's too much. I can do that, but I think I still have an inhibition threshold when it comes to initiating therapy.
TN11: Yes, I still find it difficult when someone has extreme secondary complications and everything. And there are a lot of cases where it's just a bit difficult, where it's neglected or ignored, suppressed. And that's difficult there, you actually want to start treating as much as possible and say: "Yes, you have to do it now." And on the other side is the patient, who then tends to say that they didn't want all this and then it's difficult to bombard them with x amount of medication. I think that's the most difficult thing.
TN12: I also find it difficult, you always have to put it in the context of the patient, don't you? I've had several patients who were poorly adjusted, who were otherwise very old, very elderly, barely at home or in a nursing home. Where you also have to ask yourself how well you can still control their blood sugar: "What is the most appropriate control option that you can still implement at home with the available resources within a reasonable framework?" Sometimes I still find that difficult, because then you have to think about which long-term or twice mixed (regimen) or should you inject at all or not at all? What is the goal? Sometimes I still find that a bit difficult, the degree of pragmatism that you should still have somehow.
GA: And what do you think are the possible patient factors that make treatment easier and make treatment very complicated. You mentioned some of them, suppressing illness, not even thinking about it...
TN12: Cognition and age.
GA: ...cognition and age.
TN9: Psychiatric disorders, probably still.
TN11: Yes, and simply understanding the disease, or simply that they know what exactly the problem is. And what the individual medications change or how they work, I think that's very important, yes...
TN21: Well, actually...
TN11: And I think there is, maybe here in the inpatient it is perhaps explained almost too little or. Ehm, what exactly the effect is, yes.
TN21: Yes, I also believe that yes... So education is an important point. But for many, it's perhaps simply the level of education, how they take it in and whether they can take it in and understand it at all. And then of course people who work in shifts and have a very irregular rhythm are probably also very difficult to integrate.
GA: Okay. Now I come to another question, let's imagine an ideal world where we have no problem with resources and every patient with diabetes, regardless of whether they need medication or lifestyle intervention or insulin, gets a sensor implanted at least once so that they can deal with their own blood glucose levels and learn from them. Having seen your readings, which were mostly good, could you still imagine that this would bring any additional benefit to the patient or even be harmful? What are your thoughts on this? 
TN11: Well, I do believe that it can be useful. I think, yes, it simply requires that you look at the figures and think about them. And I think that's something important or. If you're not aware of it or you're not conscious of it, then you're not going to pay that much attention to it. Ehm, so I don't think it can have a harmful effect, I think it's more useful if you actively think about it. Of course, with us, we have a bit of background knowledge and everything, so it's a bit easier to perhaps find the numbers more exciting and everything and... prefer to observe and everything, but I think that just has to come with it, doesn't it? I think just sticking one on someone or somehow applying a sensor and then saying, "Yes, watch your numbers." I don't think that's enough. Exactly.
GA: Yes. That means it should be accompanied by instruction and then also...
TN11: Sure, yes. And that you then also discuss and evaluate it and everything, yes, I think that's part of it.
TN14: I know, just visualizing it for two weeks so that you can really just see how it is could also be helpful. And that you can see the direct impact. And you can really see it, it's not just a number, you can see the curve.
GA: So that's the advantage, that instead of just a number you see a curve, you can see how the curve develops.
TN14: Yes, and also, for example, where the peak was, whether it was still...
TN11: Yes, and above all you can see the effects, which are probably very easy to understand. And then you can say: "I'm going to do more sport or something else this week and then see what the curve looks like." So I think that's a huge advantage that you can... I think it's necessary or that you write down the blood sugar in your tables and everything in your diabetes books, but somehow an overview for the patient, I don't know how he has that. It's just a huge collection of numbers and of course if there's a nice curve or something, it's much easier to see what the effect of these measures has been.
GA: Are there any additions from you? Now I would say that you are still a medical student. At the moment we don't have the sensor as a tool that we can use before you go to the diabetes lecture. That you can see your own blood glucose level and then you go to the lecture, can you imagine if there was the possibility, would you attend diabetes lectures more attentively? Or would you understand more about it?
TN14: I generally have the feeling that if you have some kind of connection to yourself in the lectures, then you are somehow always a bit more attentive. From that point of view, if you had somehow dealt with it beforehand, you probably would have.
GA: What do you think, you are still a long way from your medical studies. Could you imagine that in an ideal world, sensors are available everywhere?
TN11: So only for students or only for medical students?
GA: For medical students?
TN9: So self-experimentation...
TN11: Yes, I think diabetes is such an important topic, so if it simply passes a medical student or any other student by, then that's not good. So I think that almost everyone is aware of that, or that you have to deal with it and I don't know how much additional benefit it brings. I think maybe you can do it better, so maybe you're already more attentive and everything, but it's a question of time until you're faced with a problem where you have a patient who has diabetes and then you have to take a closer look at it again and make your own considerations. Yes, my opinion.
TN21: Well, I think it would have... When I think about how I went to the lecture, when I went, it would have helped a lot. Because you... diabetes is a really important topic, but I think especially as a medical student, when you're so overwhelmed with all the options and can't really prioritize what to do.... I don't know whether the training in Germany is perhaps a little different to that in Switzerland, that may also play a part, but diabetes is a big issue. But I also didn't realize that it was such a huge topic. That it actually affects every second internal medicine patient. And also these figures with blood sugar levels, what's normal, what's not normal. You somehow learn so many numbers during your studies and try to memorize them somehow. So I think it would have been pretty cool for me to see that beforehand and really understand it in practice. 
GA: Would this tool also help to understand the patient's perspective? That you feel like you're doing an intervention that diabetes patients potentially have to do with themselves and I've gotten to know this intervention a bit and I can put myself in the shoes of the patients, how would they feel? Because in addition to the sensor, they also have to regulate their blood sugar levels, they have to inject insulin or take medication. Do you now think differently about everyday life than you did before?
TN9: I would like to say something about the first question. I think I've benefited a lot from a sensor like this, simply because it arouses my interest more. So learning by seeing, doing, hands on. Rather than just the theory, but more as a gimmick and an interest. Then I might have thought about why someone or why I'm becoming hypoglycemic, what the... what DDs are from that or something. Yes, and I don't find the second question. Because nowadays someone has a watch and checks their pulse all the time and so on, so I mean, everyone is always shook (shocked), so they're checking it all the time. I think that's just one more curve they're looking at. So I don't think that makes you feel like a patient. That's my impression.
GA: Yes, yes.
TN11: Well, I was most likely to feel that way when I was at the swimming pool or somewhere else. So when you were approached: "Hey, do you have diabetes?" Or colleagues... That's what got me into it the most, I have to say, where I realize that it's also somehow a signal that somehow has an effect on those around you and they also notice when you're wearing something like that. And some of the reactions were a bit cautious and everyone didn't know how to ask. That's what helped me the most, but I think the blood glucose measurement itself... Ehm, I've now... I think it's more like... maybe it's given me a bit of an understanding of how a diabetes patient has to deal with it.
(Others agree)
GA: TN12, do you have any additions?
TN12: I might have another aspect. I think that the possibility that you have because of the sensor, that you can always read it out quite easily, can probably also put you under a bit of pressure. That you should actually have it so well under control, because after all, you can track it. And depending on the personality of the diabetes patient, it can also be difficult or lead to situations where someone says: "Why is your diabetes still so poorly controlled, you have such a sensor, you could do that?" I just think about it, that's something I've already caught myself thinking a bit. For me as a healthy person, it's also been a bit of a burden, because then I have the feeling: "What's going on, what can I optimize so that I don't get sick... so that I don't become diabetic or something?" But I don't think that's the case with these patients, you should also bear in mind that it can also put someone under a bit of pressure.
GA: After wearing the sensor yourself, do you feel like managing diabetes for the patient is much more challenging than you thought it would be, or just as challenging, or even easier when they have a sensor like this?
TN12: I think that's what you would think, that it should be or is easier now.
GA: So easier than before?
TN12: Yes. But as a study participant, I didn't have to react to the values in any way or, not necessarily. And I think it's difficult to assess this question in this way, I think you would have to ask patients.
TN9: But I think what else...
TN11: I think it's certainly getting easier. So I have the feeling with the technology, you can see that at any time with the numbers. But I clearly see this simply as an intermediate step until you simply have a fully automatic insulin pump afterwards and that is the next step, that you don't actually have to do this anymore or that it automatically measures and applies insulin or. That's simply the intermediate step that we have now or and I think that simplifies it.
TN9: Well, I think I remember a scene from a school friend of my older sister who had diabetes. And when she was with us, she disappeared into the toilet to do her thing and I think that's an image that has stayed with me. It's a bit... obvious, but it's also somehow discreet when you're wearing something like that and it's not exactly visible or it's somehow no longer like that, yes, you don't have to go and get pierced. And I think that's a huge advantage, that you don't always have to get pricked. And I was also surprised how little it hurt... well, it didn't actually hurt at all, like getting it in. It's...
GA: In other words, blood glucose monitoring has become less painful than before.
TN11: Yes.
GA: And potentially, if you now have a future patient who also has the Freestyle Libre sensor, do you have a different approach to talking to the patient or do you have the feeling that wearing the sensor yourself didn't help very much in this respect and yet it did help?
TN11: Yes, I don't think I've looked at it enough with the patients and talked about it and evaluated what they think about the sensor. I don't think I have enough experience to be able to say that. Because then we just have our blood glucose values, which we look at and the HbA1c, which we determine and talk about that, but we don't talk about how he does it and what he thinks about it. That's where we lack a bit of time in each case. And I think that's very time-consuming care, where you simply need to keep the appointments, the check-ups, and you usually have them very regularly. So I wouldn't presume to do that on an inpatient basis.
GA: And in the ward, when patients have insulin, you take four blood glucose measurements. Will you see these four absolute figures differently now that the sensor has been worn or will you still see them as absolute figures? Can you present a curve there, or has there not been much change?
TN11: Well, it's always been clear to me that blood sugar is something that fluctuates extremely, especially now with diabetics. And that it's simply a slight reference value and ehm, we noticed that immediately, as soon as you've eaten something, the value... You can... You know something's wrong, you have to look at it very critically, the values you have there. But of course we're still a bit interested in where he is, whether he's over thirty or not. So I have to say, I'm very cautious, I'm not somehow, I don't take every figure at face value, of course.
GA: And when you yourselves looked at your very, very tight blood sugar regulation, the blood sugar hardly fluctuated much. But what factors have you realized that still have an influence, a regular influence on blood sugar? Peaks or troughs?
TN11: Yes, sport, sleep, I have the feeling.
TN12: Stress.
TN11: Yes, stress...
TN9: Well, I just didn't do enough sport and certainly always slept too little, so... (shrugs)
TN12: Same. Too much stress.
(All laugh)
TN9: Well, I haven't really had much hypoglycemia either...
GA: With you, TN14?
TN14: Yes, especially sleeping, which has had an effect, and sport. Yes.
GA: And now, if I may ask you, there is another study underway where you not only have a sensor but you can test the meals and you can really objectify more precisely how the blood sugar behaves. And you would have to recruit candidates, from what information would you say: "Yes, yes, do it"? And what criteria would make you say: "Ehh, it's no good." What would you say?
TN11: So what is it about?
GA: To take a closer look at how food, which food affects blood sugar and how.
TN9: So: "What happens when you have eaten a Vermicelles?"
TN11: So...
TN9: Yes, I still find it exciting that you have a bit of an idea. But it's more a question of interest, I mean, in the end it doesn't really matter if it's always measured anyway.
GA: So your main motivation was interest? How is my blood sugar behaving in my body? Do I understand correctly?
(Participants nod)
TN9: Yes, well, I also paid a bit of attention to myself, at the beginning I also wrote down what I ate. So I was interested, that's why I saw that gummy bears are so bad.
GA: And, TN11, you briefly mentioned earlier that, firstly, we don't have enough time in the inpatient setting for patients to receive in-depth diabetes care and they also have separate appointments for this. But sometimes they come to hospital with hyperglycaemic derailment, which means that this is the main reason why they come to hospital, because they can't manage at home. If you potentially have such a patient, would you be able to interact differently with the patient thanks to your information or will it be similar to before? My specific question is, in training to create more awareness for patients, has this sensor had any effect on you, made an impact or not?
TN21: I could show the patient a lot more understanding that he doesn't measure that often and that it just slipped his mind. I think that's my main point, which I think I draw from the fact that you can really just forget about it.
GA: And that's the only reason he's not a non-compliant patient. 
TN21: Yes, exactly! That you're not immediately stigmatized or anything.
GA: It can happen...
TN9: It makes sense...
GA: Do you have any other additions?
TN11: Yes, I think the exceptional situations, when there is somehow a youthful hyperglycemia derailment, we haven't noticed that ourselves. That's why I find it now... I don't know what it would trigger in me if I suddenly measured a sugar of thirty. Then I would probably react differently, but we can't do that in this simulation if you just measure it in a healthy person. So I have less of that now, it has helped me. I also think I can somehow understand that better because of the compliance.
GA: Yes.
TN9: What I also found exciting was to see that there is not necessarily a correlation between how you feel and what you measure.
GA: Hmm, interesting.
TN9: That means that a patient doesn't even notice, so to speak... I always have the feeling that you probably know that, but it's true. I thought that was cool. I still think it's good that you simply can't rely at all on what you... so there are certainly people who feel it well, but...
GA: That means you don't have to be able to feel blood sugar well. You can, but you don't have to. 
TN9: Exactly.
GA: Chiara, do you have any questions?
CA: Yes, perhaps when we come back to the use in training or the self-awareness of doctors, you all mentioned some of the disadvantages of the sensor... Would you say it's worth experiencing the disadvantages for yourself, for the self-awareness that you can gain afterwards for the transfer to your profession? In other words, if you try it on healthy people, to experience the disadvantages too?
TN9: So absolutely ethically justifiable.
TN12: Yes, sure.
TN21: If it just itches or someone has an allergic reaction or something... Then of course not.
TN9: Unless someone has... Yes, or someone really has a strong hypochondriacal disorder or something, then it's somehow no longer. So really that they can't sleep afterwards and so on, then it's no good, but otherwise really...
CA: So with restrictions, actually yes...
TN14: Well, if it's voluntary anyway, you can't force anyone to do something like that. 
CA: Yes, of course.
TN14: So for people who are confident and who just want to know. Those who aren't interested won't do it.
TN9: I think you need to offer a bit of a point of contact for someone when questions arise. I think that would be important, that you're not on your own. Or that you can say: "Oh, what is it now? What do I have to do with this?" Because questions are sure to come up and uncertainties are sure to arise, so that you can also accompany people if there is any indication of a diagnosis... So I think that would be important.
GA: Hmm. How important do you find this relationship of trust between doctor and patient in diabetes? Is it very important or ...
TN9: It's always big, no matter what specialty.
TN12: Hmm, I think so too.
TN11: Yes, I think it's particularly important with a chronic illness like diabetes, where a lot of checks and so on are necessary. Much more so than with other problems and long-term care is somehow the most sensible. Above all, I think that it can simply be someone and not somehow... I always find it a bit problematic when a diabetes situation derails and you're always in different hospitals, I don't think that's ideal. Because then there are too many people talking and changing and everything, I think that, yes... Someone simply has to bring it all together and they always have to be able to discuss it. I think there's so much that you have to talk through with the patient and report and explain again and so on, it can't possibly be spread over several people.
GA: Yes. Is there anything that anyone can say about being able to better understand glucose regulation from your own perspective and from the perspective of patients? Was there anything in this study that would probably not have been possible for you without studying? So it's about additional advantages for you, was there any advantage where you say: "Yes, without having had self-experience it would be difficult to read about it in a book, for example."?
TN11: So I think... I think... you can still read about a lot of things, but it's always, I still find it extremely fascinating how my body simply reacts and how you can admire how well it somehow works for you. And so I think that's what we tend to forget a little bit, how many people are simply ill and how many people have it and that it just doesn't work. But I still find it extremely impressive how it works in a healthy person. And when I saw the curve, which is simply flat, sometimes even though I've eaten something or other, that really amazed me and everything. I thought it was nice to see that somehow or other. Otherwise we see, we're already influenced and mostly just see the extreme cases and that's not really normal. I mean, the majority of us still don't have diabetes and yes, we shouldn't forget that.
GA: Yes. What is it for you, TN12, without participating in the study... So new knowledge, I say, thanks to the study?
TN12: Yes, the direct effects of certain meals or feelings or sensitivities on blood sugar, I wasn't so aware of that, but otherwise...
GA: TN21?
TN21: I think for me it's the point that I've already said, to have this understanding for patients who somehow don't measure so consistently all the time. Because I don't know now how I would have measured if it had had a consequence, then I would probably have done it differently. But just that in general, yes, you can understand much better that people forget this in everyday life.
GA: Hmm, thank you. TN9?
TN9: I always think it's good, self-awareness, I always think it's good. It simply promotes empathy, always. 
GA: Well, you could all say that it was at least an empathy-promoting experience, even if you didn't always think about patients every day.
(All agree)
GA: With you TN14?
TN14: Yes, just how quickly the body reacts, especially to food, how quickly the sugar goes up but then comes down again. It's logical, actually, but I think it's different when you look at it like that.
GA: I would also like to mention very briefly that in the first Focus Group interview, one of the participants said that it is now slowly becoming a trend that is being pushed in the direction of a healthy lifestyle. There is also a company in America called Levels, which simply offers these sensors to the healthy population with a certain identity, so that those without diabetes who wear the sensor have a healthy lifestyle, because they will consistently pay attention to everything and change something accordingly. What are your opinions on this, what do you think critically or uncritically, what do you think? Is it a good solution or not necessarily?
(TN9 shakes his head)
TN12: I think it depends on the personality of the wearer. It can lead to absolute compulsiveness or an eating disorder or depending on the breeding ground of the personality. I think if someone can handle it well and has a healthy relationship with their body or an illness, it can be interesting. Perhaps also protective, preventative, but I think it can also... Well, in relation to me, not just positive, depending on your personality, it can probably drive you crazy and therefore also your environment, depending on whether you somehow align your entire eating or sports or other behavior with this sugar.
TN11: I have the feeling that it's really more the people who are inclined to do this who have this disposition anyway. 
(All laugh)
TN11: Well, I think I'm a bit critical of that too. It was just in the newspaper the other day, somehow it really is a glucose diet and all sorts of things that are available now.
GA: That was also in the NZZ, wasn't it?
TN11: Yes, I think I saw it in the Tagesanzeiger, exactly...
GA: Tagesanzeiger, yes.
TN11: ... where it was about that. And I think that, so that, yes, I mean ultimately you can measure everything that you somehow have in your body, and the question is simply whether you are allowed to do that and whether it somehow leads somewhere where it makes sense. Personally, I have to say that I do certain things... I'm happy to take part in a study like that, but to be honest I don't want to know everything that's going on inside me, I don't want that either. And that's just the fear that I have a bit, that people will always want to know everything, and then finally explain it all somehow and it's questionable what the consequences are, so yes...
TN9: I think if you want to get hold of it for a while out of curiosity, out of interest in physiology or something like that, I think that's justifiable, everything else I find narcissistically disturbed. So really, it's just a kind of self-... Well, narcissistic might be the wrong word, but it's just eternal self-optimization instead of just using a bit of common sense and finding out a bit about healthy eating. And not always eating ready-made products and ehm... Yes, I think our...
GA: Or gummy bears...
(All laugh)
TN9: Yes, sure... But I didn't let that influence me. 
GA: Yes, and there should be three or four jelly babies in there too, right?
TN9: So just concentrating a bit on life and not just concentrating on controlling and everything and everywhere and in every area we have to be super woman/man and... I think that's just pathological, it's just not healthy. And I think our society, I mean our food, the food that's on offer in our grocery stores is debatable anyway. So I think it's interesting to take a broader approach there. And then you say, if someone has prediabetes, you say: "Yes, maybe it makes sense for them to see what's happening, to get a feel for their lifestyle." Again, I think that makes sense, but then it might have an effect. But otherwise, I think it's just a question of... If you say in America that the average American moves twenty minutes a day, including going to the toilet, then the problem is somewhere else. So, but I'm a bit very critical. I also find it strange when people monitor their sleep all the time. I also find it interesting to see how I sleep... Once! And then it's just like... 
GA: Yes. With you, TN21?
TN21: I also find it very critical, because in principle it's also a question of what is the consequence? Someone who is young, healthy and probably does an hour of sport a day will probably get a tracker like this, a blood glucose tracker. But that's not the target group that will develop diabetes. And as medical staff, we'll probably be forced to refer patients who are so... so anxious that they come to us with a curve and say: "Yes, now what should I do with it?" And we say: "Nothing." But they just want something to be done somehow and ehm, yes, that's why I don't really think it makes sense. So as TN9 says, I think it's great to try it out, but I just don't think it makes sense to track yourself permanently.
GA: Yes. So when I summarize, I see from your experience that benefit simplification for blood glucose control where it's needed because if someone has diabetes or also has to inject insulin, of course they need some number and also number to number relationships so that they can adjust that. But outside of that, curiosity so you know the physiology, no added benefit anywhere else. Prediabetes, to prevent that, that they know what's the connection with food, but otherwise, actually, you should also mention the critical points that you don't use something a little bit too much that it even becomes detrimental in everyday life. That you are really forced to see the numbers, because otherwise you don't feel the numbers. Is there anything we have forgotten to ask you where you think this information would be important for this study in terms of blood glucose regulation, in terms of understanding from the patient's perspective?
(Silence, shaking head)
TN21: I can't think of anything.
GA: Have we actually discussed all the main points?
(Participants nod)
GA: Very good, in that case many, many thanks for taking part!

