Focus Group 4
Information about the appointment
Date: 08.11.2023
Participants: TN13, TN15, TN16, TN20, TN24, TN25
Transcript
GA: So, it's about the map of diabetes before you even heard about the sensor from here, that there was a study. How far have you been aware, what has changed in the last twenty years? Someone can start.
TN13: So I think for me it's, I knew that there is now much more continuous glucose monitoring and that there are now also new pumps that can recognize both upward and downward trends and work against them. And ehm, that actually many more patients with type 1 almost all tend to have pumps and no longer inject themselves.
GA: Are there any additions?
TN15: I have experience with the sensor from my personal environment, at least a few years ago. And yes, it was actually very well received by my friend. There was still the question of the costs, the health insurance, which was a burden for her, especially at the beginning. That it was like spare buttons, so to speak, that were not reimbursed. So...
(GA's phone rings, as does that of another participant, both go out briefly and return shortly afterwards)
CA: So if one falls off, the replacement is not remunerated.
TN15: Only a certain number, yes exactly.
TN25: Well, I can perhaps say that I used to work at Zurich University Hospital and we had a different regime there. There it was always clear that patients had to be compliant with insulin application before a sensor was even considered. Now that I've looked into the subject again, it's surprising to me that it's already so widespread. And the other aspect that I still have is that I have fellow athletes who do triathlons, for example, or marathons, or who race bikes, who now voluntarily wear such a sensor to better control their nutrition during training. I've actually heard more about this than about the medical field.
GA: Yes, interesting.
TN16: Yes, I have the same thing. It's also often used regularly for athletes, especially those who do endurance sports.
(TN24 adds)
GA: TN24, we have already started. Chiara Amstutz is a psychology student and as you know, it's being recorded, the interview and we've started, how far did you know the map of diabetes before you even decided to take part in this study? What has changed about diabetes in recent years, what are you so aware of, how do you feel about it?
TN24: Yes, I already knew about social media through Freestyle Libre. So there are bloggers who have type 1 or type 2 diabetes who also write about how they organize life with diabetes, how they get the disease under control. And I think it's really useful for people like that. Then I've also heard about diet and healthy lifestyle applications, that different diets are practiced depending on glucose levels. I think I've also seen a few books that have come out, but I haven't read them.
GA Now, you've been wearing this sensor for two weeks. For some, it wasn't the whole two weeks, TN16, for you it was only seven days...
TN16: Only seven days yes...
GA: What were some special moments while wearing the sensor, what stood out or what surprised you? You mentioned the problems once, only seven days and then it went away. 
TN13: So you mean with the values or with the application?
GA: With your own values and applications, how comfortable is this technology for you to gain experience or has there already been certain disruption where you have said: "Yes, I took part in the study, but it's not that pleasant either."
TN25: Well, I didn't really notice it anymore. It was always pointed out to me because my children tried to tear one off. But I actually found it pleasant. And I found it exciting, ehm, I had in particular... I wasn't aware that my blood sugar always tends towards hypoglycemia an hour after eating. And that also correlated well with the feeling of hunger that I sometimes have an hour after I've eaten something. That surprised me and I have now been able to document that this is indeed the case. And then I also found it interesting to see what effect my eating behavior has in the sense that, for example, if I don't eat anything at work and then eat a sandwich for the first time at 2 p.m., that's really bad for my constant blood sugar level. That messes everything up, as if I really eat a lot and regularly during the day, it doesn't make much difference to my blood sugar at all. And the other thing is that I very rarely drink alcohol, but I once drank alcohol one evening and then there was an immediate spike, so that was impressive.
TN16: It did hurt a bit for me, but I think it's just that a needle bent and that's why it no longer worked. But because the needle was somehow at an angle, I could feel it.
GA: All the time?
TN16: No, just somehow the last two days and then it just stopped working. It probably moved a little during the night or something and then the needle became crooked. But that's why it only hurt a little at the end.
GA: It has happened to four or five participants in total, either they dropped out or it hurt, so it's probably not entirely unproblematic. What else was your experience?
TN16: To be honest, I was always afraid that I had diabetes because I eat so many sweets and a cousin of mine also has diabetes and that was always an issue for me. And I measured my fasting blood sugar once and then it was so close and then I thought: "Okay, I'll do it now, maybe I'll see what the blood sugar levels are like." And then it was exciting to see how they fluctuate and how they are over the course of the day. For example, I once ate grapes as a snack and then I saw that my blood sugar levels had become very, very high, more so than with chocolate or other sweets, for example. But fortunately all the values remained in the good range.
(All laugh)
TN13: I've also found it very interesting, for me too, as soon as I've exercised or done sport, my blood sugar levels have risen and then fallen. But it's really... So I've gone from sitting on the sofa to just emptying the letterbox, my blood sugar levels have risen immediately. And I also found it quite exciting to see when I was doing sport. And ehm, I also noticed that I often woke up at night, for example, because I hadn't slept well, so my sugar levels were higher. So I don't know whether that's ultimately due to the stress hormones. I still found it really exciting. I noticed that the sensor didn't stick so well, so I stuck it on with a plaster at the end. Because it was like... the plaster stuck but the white part at the top of the plaster slowly fell away a bit. Then I thought, yes, it's better stuck on, also because I do a lot of sport where you use your arms. What I found very interesting is that diabetes is actually an invisible disease and this sensor makes it visible. And I've also been approached by lots of people: "What's that? Why do you have this now?" I also... I was still impressed, people are like that, it's been like that, some people are like hmmm, don't know exactly and don't ask and others actively approach it and suddenly it becomes a topic of discussion. And then another thing, I have a good friend of mine who has type 1 diabetes and we compared our curves. But she has a pump. And then it was also exciting to see that it rises much faster and is much higher and more constant. But it was just exciting to be next to each other and compare. 
GA: On your comment that people approached you, why did you... how did you feel about that? 
TN13: Well, I just found it, I found that it was actually... Well, of course, they were all people who knew me, and they thought: "She's never had this before, what is it now all of a sudden?" And then I explained what it was and many of them didn't even know what it was. And they did, so I have the feeling that more people know now. But yes, I really thought that, I thought that although it's a mega good tool, it's just like making an invisible illness visible. And that can be good and not good. So I also went for a massage once and he didn't... didn't touch my arm. He didn't touch it. And he did touch the other side and everything else and then I thought, that's a bit weird. So you can ask, as if it was something really bad. So that just struck me very strongly. And then my friend who has diabetes thought it was really great that we were doing it and thought it was really cool that we were doing it and that it was really appreciated by her when we saw and did it.
GA: And what did you yourself feel, was it cool to have tried it out yourself?
TN13: Yes, I found it exciting. But the first... Well, you notice that after two weeks it's like: "Ah yes, you can look at the sugar again." But at the beginning I observed it more.
TN20: Ehm, I also found it incredibly exciting. I've actually, I've also known or seen people check it on their cell phone and that there's an alarm if it's too high and so on. But it was really exciting to do it myself. I was a bit scared of the app now that I've seen it and I have to say I didn't feel it at all, so I'm really positively surprised by it. Afterwards I was a bit afraid that it would fall off or that I would rip it out when I took it off. And even though the adhesive came off a bit on the outside, there's another adhesive on the inside, so it held quite well for me. Exactly, I've also noticed that my glucose levels rise during short periods of sport or exertion and then drop again when I do a bit more endurance. And what I also noticed was that once when I was ill, my blood sugar was much higher.
GA: Do you have any knowledge from your medical studies, because you're one of us with very, very fresh insights into medical studies, can you explain or physiologically explain the fact that your blood sugar rises when you're ill?
TN20: Yes, so with fever the body simply needs more, that it works more. And then I've also read that insulin resistance... that it needs more insulin. Exactly.
GA: And you have now been able to experience this hands-on on your own body.
TN20: ...I saw it, exactly.
GA: How is it with you, TN24?
TN24: I find it really interesting in conversation that everyone is so different. The sensor was a bit stressful for me, I have to say. It's not the first time I've worn the sensor, I don't have diabetes, but I had it in my settings that I had to be alerted to threshold values on both sides. And the same evening that I got the sensor and I drove home, I got an alarm, hypoglycemia, and then I kind of yes, then I eat something, then I ate something. And that was so high in carbohydrates and then after twenty minutes I also immediately got the hypoglycemia alarm. And ehm, so I know this tendency from before, I thought: "Okay, that was a different metabolism." I had the alarm hypoglycemia at four o'clock at night or five o'clock at night and that was a kind of resistant hypoglycemia, so I didn't feel anything but the alarm goes off. So it's really not dependent on body position and no matter what I eat, it will ring again after twenty minutes or so. And then the first day I was stressed, I googled, but then I thought to myself, "Well, I survived until I was twenty-nine." (everyone laughs) I don't feel any of that and I'd rather just turn the whole thing off because I... So the body should somehow regulate itself. So maybe not for everyone from 3.5 to 4.5, I don't know, maybe it's physiological. I don't feel any of that. So I can sometimes be angry or so conspicuous when I haven't eaten anything. (All laugh) A bit more impatient, but I don't have the feeling that I'm going to faint. And then I turned the whole thing off and I have the feeling that if you don't have that, the alarm on, then the curve will automatically even out. And if you also switch off Bluetooth at night, that's even better. (everyone laughs again) 
GA: But then you have no values.
TN24: Yes exactly, then I had to force myself to remember every day to measure a few times and switch on a few times, because I thought, I promised the Gurpreet, otherwise it will be embarrassing and a waste of material if there are no values.
GA: And now when you, it's interesting that you say that you kept getting this hypo alarm but you didn't feel it yourself. And if you put yourself in the patient's shoes, a patient will probably not only get hypo alarms but also hyper alarms. What could be working in this patient, this technology?
TN24: Yes, I think it can cause a lot of uncertainty. But I'm also thinking about it now, on the contrary, as a doctor I can perhaps also perceive it so carelessly, because I can say: "I don't feel it." If the other person says, "I can feel it." Then that's not a bad thing. And we actually had a patient, not recently, but a few weeks ago, who came in for a hypoglycemia alert from Freestyle Libre 2 came in here or something and she didn't feel anything.
TN25: Yes, I could imagine that there can be a certain amount of measurement stress for certain patients, that not everyone is mentally suited to it. We also see that in pneumology, with oxygen measurements or blood pressure measurements, which are not good for certain people. 
GA: Yes, that's right.
TN16: But on the other hand, it can also provide security, because then you know: "Okay, the sensor will tell me if my values are too high or too low.
TN24: Or, on the contrary, you wait for the alarm with the fear: "Yes, I have to have something with me and yes, I have to react somehow and I can't completely relax now or somehow go to sleep with the intention of sleeping in and not being woken up at four o'clock." 
GA: How limiting can fear of hypoglycemia be for diabetes patients who inject insulin? What is your estimate?
TN13: I think so.
TN15: I think so too.
TN13: Well, I think there are a lot of people who have hypoglycaemia all the time and maybe don't feel it so well anymore and are very afraid of it. So yes, and then they just somehow have the feeling that they always have to have something with them so that they can always eat something. I have the feeling that if you don't have a constant measurement, you have to get used to it and say to yourself: "I'm not always measuring." But you have to try to listen to yourself a little bit and everything that you can measure. Because if you measure again and again, what I've noticed is that it jumps back and forth so much. It's constant on average, but the individual measurements are so different that you can't rely on a single measurement. That's what I decided to do, these blood sugar measurements, you can somehow say it's much too high or it's much too low, but you can't say anything else because it's so dependent on what's going on, is someone ill, does someone have a fever, has someone just been running, has someone been lying around for two hours. So you can't, you can't go into it unless it's far too high or it's far too low. So from my perspective, my sugar has always been in the range but always a bit up and down.
GA: Fluctuating in the range...?
TN13: Yes, exactly. 
GA: Were you already aware of this information or did you become more aware of it when you saw your own data?
TN13: More for me. So I knew it wasn't constant. But I've become more aware of how much it varies. So it's not from three to five. But whether it's 4.9 or 5.6, you can't rely on it in any way.
GA: And does it matter if it's 4.6 or 5.6?
TN13: No, not at all.
GA: It probably matters if it's 15 or more...
TN13: Exactly.
GA: Helps... Do you have a feeling for patients when they have to choose between capillary measurement and sensor. What do you think the patients would choose or would you think from the patient's point of view now, which technology would be good if they need blood glucose monitoring.
TN16: I think it depends on the type of patient we have. I would use a sensor on a young patient who is cognitively fit. But perhaps also elderly patients who are no longer cognitively fit, then rather capillary.
TN25: I don't know whether it wouldn't be good for everyone to take conventional measurements at the beginning in order to process and understand the disease. And also to see how compliance is. If they don't do that, then I also get important information as a doctor, which is lost if I give them a sensor and only get these values. 
GA: Did the sensor have any effect on you? That you had the feeling that now I have to change my lifestyle? Or was it supportive, a confirmation: "Wow, this lifestyle is really good for me?"
TN15: I'd just been to the emergency and had a very unhealthy diet. And afterwards I ate gummy bears and then I thought: "Oh, now it's going to go up." And then it didn't rise at all and then I thought: "Ah, well then..."
(all laugh)
GA: So there are gummy bears inside?
TN15: Exactly. Not organ juice, I noticed that it had just gone up. No, I actually had a pretty constant progression. I was never too high or too low. And that's why I made a bit of the same observations as you two (TN13 and TN25) with the feeling of hunger, that it was pretty consistent. Then, I have the feeling that it also gives you a sense of trust in your body, that you can rely on your body to look a bit like: "Hey, maybe you should eat something now." And then you do that and then it's already well adjusted.
GA: Olga said earlier that she simply switched off Bluetooth when it interfered. How often did you forget to scan or not think about it or...?
TN13: I have already managed to always scan. In my case it simply interrupted the connection, i.e. signal loss, and then I had to scan again to reconnect. But in the end, I don't think I ever had a gap. What I found a bit stressful was that you have to keep to the eight hours, so now on a good day when you're off work, you really have to do it last thing before you go to sleep and first thing when you wake up... and then you have to think like, just when you get up, "Oh, I have to scan the sugar right now, right now." That's always... Well, I think that's a bit of a shame because the first thing I have to think about is sugar. And ehm, it's just so direct, I find it more pleasant when you can just get up. But it's only if it interrupts, if it's connected, you wouldn't have to scan it every eight hours.
GA: Yes, so the connection is of course already... active scanning helps the sensor to measure the correct value. Because otherwise it will determine some value itself that is not correct with the tissue sugar value. Eight-hourly must be with the sensor, but now there is a new sensor that works continuously via the connection. You don't have to hold it up and scan, it runs continuously.
TN25: I have adapted well. So when the sensor was no longer there, I thought I would have to look again...
(all laugh)
TN13: Yes, it was so strange when he was away.
TN15: I just realized that you're really dependent on your cell phone with it, of course. Otherwise you're already super dependent. I actually wanted to go two days without a cell phone, and then I realized: "Oh no, I have to scan." So it's also mega, it's like something...
GA: Exactly. Was there any experience for you where you want to share, where you say: "I didn't think so, that surprises me now"? Where something was different from your previous perception about glucose regulation or how the sensor works?
TN16: In my case, there were a lot of different values at night, but then you explained that it could also be a measurement error. But I was surprised, I actually thought that the blood glucose value would be more stable in the seam and mine was mega fluctuating, even at night. But apparently it really can be a measurement error.
GA: Or also because you were not in the right place and therefore more came to light. In your opinion, how important are patient-related factors for diabetes management? So is the patient very, very important to be involved in diabetes management or can you simply help the patient with today's education and technology?
TN13: I think that the patient is very important. Especially if you want to prevent the long-term effect. If you have a young patient with type 1, then I think it's more important than if you're giving insulin to old patients, where you can do it via a pump, where they simply don't have to worry about it. Then it's also an option. But that's not the aim, actually with young people you'd rather want them to have this awareness and adapt to the fact that they can also track long-term damage, because it's a disease that doesn't... that lasts for years. That's why I think it's important to train them well and motivate patients to really be involved.
TN25: With type 2, we also want everyone to adapt their lifestyle so that they have as few high sugar levels as possible. And that's a bit like taking away responsibility if you automate everything too much and the patient is no longer responsible. He thinks to himself: "Yes, now automatic measurement, maybe automatic insulin application at some point, why should I care much now?"
TN24: I think it also offers great potential for people with prediabetes. You can virtually save yourself all the medication, all the illness, if you perhaps observe your own body a little and somehow try different diets, interventions and exercise. And ehm maybe you can avoid so much suffering from diabetes. Because I think quite a lot of people have prediabetes and you can achieve a lot by changing your lifestyle. 
GA: And this experience, where you yourself have now worn a sensor, which you probably knew about before but didn't wear on your own body. If a patient is now in the department and he already has a sensor, how comfortable do you feel talking to this patient? Has this experience changed how you can talk to the patient, what do you think about such a patient from the patient's perspective? Has there been a change in perspective as a result of your own experience?
TN15: Yes, mega. So also in terms of if he were to get a new sensor like this. Because the questions are often, "Does it hurt?", for example, and it's something regular that you always have to use. And especially in this respect, you can say: "No, it's not painful." And so on. And I think many people still have a bit of the old image that you always have to get pricked, which many people also find unpleasant. Especially in this respect. And I think it's mainly in this respect that you give the patient this tool and that they can come to terms with it better themselves and it's then more of an empowerment of the patient. So certainly with regard to dementia and so on, of course excluded, but...
GA: But so for a patient who can apply, can probably achieve benefits.
TN15: Completely, yes.
GA: There is probably no guarantee, yes.
TN15: And just that we now know which app and so on, you can help directly and otherwise it was like: "Ah, yes, you have to somehow hold this out..." Otherwise just the practical things.
GA: So that means it has helped you personally?
TN15: Yes.
GA: Okay, what do the others think?
TN13: Yes, I think we have far too many things in medicine where patients always ask us: "Yes, what's that like?" And then we have to say: "Hmm, from experience... ehm." And although now, especially with us who are new, we don't even have the experience, which means: "From stories from experience, it's like this and that..." And now we at least have something where we can say: "Yes, no, as TN15 says, it doesn't hurt, it's super easy, the app is self-explanatory..." Exactly. So of course we don't have the curve afterwards and we don't have the alarms and so we don't know exactly how it will be afterwards. But you can at least say, like... from a practical point of view: "No, no, the sensor doesn't fall off when you take a shower and you can go swimming." And so that we now know all this and don't have to say every time: "I don't actually know that exactly." I find that very helpful.
GA: So that means your knowledge of technology has been able to influence this experience to some extent. Okay, now. Our medical student. If we move into the ideal world, instead of just lecturing frontally about glucose regulation and diabetes, if we give all medical students the experience of wearing the sensor and coming to the diabetes lecture afterwards so that they know what glucose is and what glucose does to you. Would it influence the understanding and interest of medical students to learn more about the disease from your point of view, or...?
TN20: I think so. So I also think it gives you a certain security to be able to say afterwards how to apply it and everything. How it changes, because you have seen it yourself, maybe you can also understand the fears when there is an alarm now is hypo or now is hyper. I think that's good for understanding and for the safety of the patient.
GA: So it can reflect?
TN20: I think medically you learn what influences where and how, but also in patient management, I would have said.
GA: Yes, what do the others think?
TN13: I think it's certainly super cool, but I also think there's a certain amount of hype, health hype, about regulating everything precisely. And that many more athletes are now always measuring their glucose. I think it can make sense for races or something like that, so I have a lot of athletes in my environment, including professional athletes, who have also done this, but somewhere along the line it stops with data collection about your own body, so I think that's when you don't have to. Because in the end, yes, it is, but how often do we really adapt to it afterwards? I've been observing this for two weeks now, I haven't changed my behavior. Because I somehow thought: "Yes, it's okay, so I don't have to change anything." And of course there may be one or two things that are caught that you have to change, but I think in the end it's also simply collecting data about something where, if you're actually healthy, you don't necessarily need to collect data because it's scary: "Oh, it's back to hypo at night." And then maybe it's because the sensor is set to 4.9, but in healthy people it's not a hypo at 4.9, not even at 3.9 anyway, maybe it would only be one below 3. So it takes a lot of understanding to read it correctly and if you just give it to all lay people, there might be a lot of misunderstanding behind it. So in my opinion, although it also generates a hype where you think: "Yes, you can do it, but it's not much more effective." 
TN16: Yes, I think so too. Because there are actually so many different things in medicine that we can actually try on our own bodies, even in medicine, and then it's just difficult to somehow use a blood glucose meter, yes, and I don't know, wear a splint, no. Or... Maybe you could try to go out and about in a wheelchair for two days, that would also be interesting to know, but somehow, maybe it's not possible.
GA: TN25?
TN25: I... So to be specific about the medical students, I don't know if that... so for those who are interested, it can be of some use, but I don't think that imposing something on someone is of any use.
GA: Yes.
TN25: If someone perhaps has no interest in it at all and you are then sometimes relatively far away from reality and everyday life in medical school. Perhaps it helps more to have this opportunity when you are actually working in the field.
GA: That you work directly with patients or directly in diabetology?
TN25: Yes, well, I don't think that an orthopaedically interested assistant doctor or medical student who has no interest at all in internal medicine and finds it all terrible and only does it so that he can somehow get through university would benefit much if you already come with that attitude.
GA: Yes, yes. So interest is also crucial, your own interest.
TN25: I think so too.
TN15: Yes, I would have said that too. So you only see things that were offered in a similar direction during your studies. I can't remember exactly... but ultrasound, sonography, for example. It's actually voluntary per se during the course and some people are really keen on it and want to try it out and others aren't interested per se. That's why I think it's more for those who are more interested and then of course it's always a cost-benefit consideration as to whether it wouldn't make sense later. And otherwise generally giving the population something additional that they can actually worry about, I have the feeling that that would be a bit problematic for the healthcare system at some point. If we only see now with the Apple Watch how many people go to the doctor just because of a notification and I don't know whether that wouldn't go beyond the scope somehow instead of doing something good. 
TN24: I think almost every medical specialty has contact with patients with diabetes and it's basically beneficial for everyone to see how different people can be. Of course, there may be students or junior doctors who aren't interested. But I think it also gives a good insight into how the patient feels. We've now been in patients' shoes practically every two weeks. We have observed ourselves and developed different tendencies. I think there is quite a lot of understanding of how fluctuating the value can be, what it does psychologically with different people. And so for me personally, it's been quite useful.
TN13: But I also... one part was that we were all there and could say: "How's your curve, show me, do you also have these values?" So we also compared them with each other a bit or I compared them with the friend with diabetes and I think that if you don't have it at all and you're on your own, you can see it, but you don't have anything to compare it with. So maybe that too, you don't have... There's like a lot of diabetes and hypoglycemia, but there's not so much information when healthy people simply have sugar levels, which is normal. That's why I think it was also important to be able to say to someone else: "Hey, do you also have hypoglycaemia at night?" And so that you can also talk to each other a bit, I think that was also part of it.
GA: In other words, it was nice when a few people got the sensor at the same time to talk: "Okay, what's it like for you?" Personally, I thought it was cool that a few volunteers came forward at first and then one by one more came forward: "I want to do it too, I want to do it too." And it was nice to find that we influenced each other when at the beginning there probably wasn't any interest, but then suddenly you had the interest to see it too. I should actually ask the question first, but what was your personal motivation for taking part in the study? So what was it immediately: "Yes, I want to!"?
TN20: Somehow I've also seen people walking around with it and I thought, I kind of want to do that too. Simply because I was so amazed at what it's like and afterwards I was like: "Oh, I must have diabetes or..." I also think it's important to know where you stand yourself. Yes.
TN13: Yes, for me it's also simply out of interest, because I wanted to know how it feels and what it does. And also simply now, when you're somehow working on the emergency figures, it's so irregular how you eat. You have to somehow make sure that you eat enough and not eat nothing for twelve hours and just see how your body copes with it. And then also to see that even when it drops, it always rises again without me having eaten anything. So it's enormous self-regulation that takes place. And I thought that before, well, I thought that, but I was really interested in what it's really like and that's why I thought I wanted to do it simply out of an interest in self-observation in the end, yes.
TN16: I just wanted to rule out that I have it...
(All laugh)
GA: Although I told you, you can't exclude with the sensor?
TN16: Exactly, it's not a means of exclusion, but I just wanted to feel a bit safe.
GA: Okay, thank you. 
TN25: I can only agree with that. I wanted to make the experience and apart from that, if my colleagues here in the company were to conduct a study, I would always take part if it didn't harm me in any way. Because I think you should always support it.
TN15: My curiosity was actually also full and I just had a patient who had received a sensor for the first time a short time before and then I was really surprised.
TN24: Yes, I was interested too, I'm not saying anything new. After all, we are all medical people who would like to learn something about physiology and we ultimately know... well, probably relatively little from the textbooks. These curves are shown, or well, my studies were eight years ago so... basically examples of curves were shown back then but not the example of Freestyle Libre and so on. And I think that's an exciting insight.
TN25: A lot has happened recently, including in terms of medication. And I was simply out of it for a while because I was still doing pneumology and I had to catch up again and read up on what had happened here.
GA: Yes, the technology is changing faster than we are changing as people. Each of you probably has a spectrum of patients, or that's a diabetes patient who understands therapy well and is very motivated, engaged and other spectrum is, the patient doesn't even want to know about the disease and doesn't want to have any influence. And you now only have the experience of your own glucose regulation with effort, where it is associated with the sensor you have dealt with.
(TN16's phone rings, she goes out briefly)
GA: Is the awareness about patient spectrum how might a patient feel who has to live with diabetes every day, where everything is much more fluctuating like yours... Has this awareness changed through the sensor or is it similar?
TN16 (whispering): Gurpreet, how much longer will it take?
GA: About ten minutes.
TN16: Because I have to...
GA: You have to?
TN16: Yes, may I go?
GA: Yes, if you have anything to add, you can add and then leave. Did I forget to ask you something?
TN16: I think I've already answered everything, so that's okay.
GA: Okay, thank you very much!
TN16: Thank you!
TN13: I think the spectrum is a bit difficult to say. Because I was really motivated to measure, but what I noticed is that after two weeks, just within two weeks, I didn't show as much interest at the end as I did at the beginning. Simply that I no longer measure it as often and am no longer as surprised when it goes down or up. I think if someone has it for much longer afterwards...
GA: Interest can...
TN13: Yes, the interest decreases, but you also get less excited about, like: "Ah, yes okay, that's always the case after I've eaten grapes, it always gets so solid. I don't have to worry, it'll come down again." So you can then assess it better. And then I think certain people, even if they've been managing it for years, don't micromanage like that anymore but really do it for days on end. Instead of us, who at the beginning probably do it every hour and later every eight hours. But whether there's a lot more of the spectrum now, that there are people who really aren't interested at all, I haven't had enough contact with them yet.
GA: Okay, hmmm.
TN20: Well, in the beginning I was so enthusiastic and measured almost every three minutes and somehow while eating or after eating I was really eagerly waiting for it to go up. And over time, my interest waned a lot and then also with eating and then, as always, it became a bit more tedious. And I can imagine that if someone has type 1 diabetes and has had it for a lifetime, it can be tedious over time. And I think the glucose sensor is actually really practical for that, because then you don't always have to prick yourself. So I think that takes away a lot of suffering or simply makes everything a bit easier.
(TN25's phone rings, she leaves the room)
TN13: It simply takes a lot of self-discipline.
TN20: Mega yes.
TN13: So that you always measure it and always check it, even if it's an automatic pump, but also if there weren't automatic pumps and you had to enter how much correction was needed. It takes so much self-discipline and I think it's impressive, it really impresses me.
GA: It takes away a part of the patient's life that is management of diabetes. Were you aware of that before?
TN13: I was already aware of it, but it's like, I see it a bit differently now. Precisely because I also measured it and you really have to, as I predicted, the first thing I do when I get up is measure sugar. So you have to do it, like really, it's something you have to do and it's not something you can use when you feel like it. So now, of course, we just do it for the two weeks.
GA: Interesting that you were able to gain so many insights in two weeks in such a short time, even though your glucose levels didn't fluctuate that much.
TN24: I found it interesting, so I find it interesting how different people can be in how they deal with it. As I said, I knew about the sensor about the sensor from a few blogs. I have a few colleagues who have suddenly developed diabetes at a young age. And then they posted on social networks like this: "Yes, I'm now wearing Freestyle Libre, now I've done some kind of sport, now my blood sugar is like this and that." And I... this is not just once, but so regularly and I thought, "Ah, some people just make a deal like this out of their own illness. But at the same time they could obviously manage it well and that probably gives a certain feeling of control over your own life, control over the illness, that you have the feeling that you are healthy again, that you have your life under control again. But at the same time, I could understand people who really don't want to know that. Because you also have to live the here and now and if you're somehow afraid, I can understand that certain people are overwhelmed by the fact that they always have to have something with them, that they always have to have their phone close to them so that they don't miss anything, especially at the beginning.
GA: That means that the challenges of diabetes were perceived differently by you, I can say that.
(Participants nod and agree with "Mhm")
TN15: Yes, I agree, especially that it doesn't have direct consequences. We don't have high blood sugar and then you realize: "Oh, now I'm in pain." But it's like, the understanding of the disease is also... has to be there, but it's just difficult to convince people to stick to it regularly, so to speak, and to have so much discipline, so I've noticed it with myself, I haven't measured regularly. Just because when I was at work, eight hours go by so quickly and then you're... Then I thought: "Oh, my God, luckily you don't have diabetes." Ehm, because yes. And above all, it's not somehow limited in time, but then it's decades. And to be honest, I thought it would be easier. I always thought: "Ah, now there's this great technology with the sensor, it's really easy." But it still takes a lot of discipline, even if it's just stalling and then reacting, but still.
GA: Chiara, you must have saved questions that I didn't ask for you so that you could ask questions?
CA: Not that big, then. Maybe just the self-awareness, you said that it would help you in your practical work with the technology to inform the patients and also a bit of understanding. But do you also see negative aspects of using it on healthy people in training and how would you assess this, how should it be accompanied, or in what form could it be done in the course of study so that it is of benefit to people?
TN13: I think if you do it like this as part of a study or in such a way that you sit together afterwards and discuss and perhaps compare, so that you don't just see your own, but see that it's different for everyone. I found it really interesting that it's different for everyone. Although, on the whole, it's similar again in that it simply fluctuates within a range. That you can then say: "Aha, okay, that's a bit of a rough understanding of normal, which can vary enormously." And then exactly. So I still have this here... because if you're just on your own and only do it for yourself, then afterwards you only know about yourself and nobody else. That's why I think if you really want to use it as training, you have to do it somehow so that you can really exchange ideas afterwards.
GA: Just like any other training.
TN13: As in other training courses, yes.
GA: What do the others think?
TN20: Well, I also find it helpful to gather experience afterwards. I would have found it funny if we had all somehow looked at and compared our blood sugar levels or a daily profile of everyone. Yes, and I think that discussing and gathering information afterwards is a bit more useful than just observing without thinking about it. And what I wanted to say about before, I think that when you see patients with polyneuropathy or consequential damage like that, I don't have the feeling that I was mega, mega understanding sometimes. And I had the feeling: "Yes, it's not that difficult to keep the blood sugar under control." And I have to say that after this experience, I now have more understanding that it's difficult and requires a lot of self-discipline and that it's not so easy to do. 
GA: Can you see yourself as more of a partner if you have worn a sensor like this and as a doctor you go to the patient and develop the feeling: "Okay, in the end the patient manages the diabetes themselves." So I can't make a direct recommendation to the patient and the patient simply follows because I as a doctor make recommendations to the patient. That's another way of communicating here, because this is a chronic illness after all. It's not something where an accident has happened and the doctor has to mend the leg and then the problem is solved. What do you think about this?
TN15: I would have said yes, as a team. Not so much: "You have to do this and that now." Because now understanding the illness is much more relevant than, as you say, the leg is broken and you have to patch it up, that's also easier to understand. So I think that has helped in the sense that you know a bit about what it's like. But I would never presume to say that I could really compare myself one-to-one with someone who has that.
GA: Yes, the experience of hypoglycemia is missing.
TN15: Yes.
TN13: And also from being permanently affected. I think that's true, all the friends I have with diabetes say that this is extremely important. So that their doctors, their diabetologists have a good understanding and the partnership and as a team and also that it's them who manage it, where they actually have to do it themselves. I've always heard: "Ah yes, no, she wasn't good. And yes, I feel comfortable there." And that's really important with chronic illnesses. And just like TN15 says, even though I have this experience now, I somehow have a better understanding of it, but I would never say that I now know what it's like. Because diabetes I don't think you can say that and I don't know, I know what it's like to have a sensor on for two weeks.
TN20: I think it also shows how important it is to have constant treatment, to lead people by the hand, but also to discuss it again and again and somehow try something new when there is something new and so on. that it just needs mega regularity and not just one treatment and then it's done, but...
GA: ...stay tuned.
TN20: Exactly.
GA: Good. Did we forget something, what do you always want to share, something came to mind during the study but was forgotten? Is there something?
(Silence)
GA: How did you find this number of participants, is it too big or is it just okay?
TN13: No, it's good.
TN25: Very pleasant.
(other participants also agree)
GA: Good.
TN13: It was a very exciting study.
GA: Thank you, thank you very much. Thank you very much.
(Participants also say thank you and say goodbye)

