Focus Group 1
Information about the appointment
Date: 15.09.2023
Participants: TN1, TN2, TN3 and TN6
Transcript
GA: A first question just in general, um, you've all looked after diabetes patients in some way, haven't you? At some point, be it in-patient or out-patient, GP locum, have you all had contact with diabetes patients? Have you ever looked after or seen patients with technology, with a sensor?
TN6: Both.
TN3: I look after them myself, but I also have friends and colleagues who have a sensor or a pump or something.
GA: Okay, okay. And what do you think is... so, one can start and then others can add, what are the challenges that diabetes patients might experience in everyday life and where is the problem of managing diabetes well?
TN1: So you know that my husband has type 1 diabetes... (phone rings, TN1 apologizes and leaves the room briefly)
GA: Maybe you can start (TN3)?
TN3: Yes, okay. So I have... (TN3 asks if dialect is okay and then continues speaking in dialect). I have a colleague who has type 1 diabetes and she has a pump and, I mean, I've known her since we were teenagers and that's when it started to be a challenge for me, now, for example, drinking alcohol. Where is the limit... Well, I mean, if you drink too much then maybe you can no longer operate the device and afterwards you have a bad reading or she told me how as a child she always had to watch her mother at night because of the hypoglycemia. And that's perhaps a challenge that people aren't even aware of, because the technology itself is mega fascinating when you read up on it, that you can simply treat such a metabolic disease with a device, with a sensor, and she's virtually cured, but there's also a lot of compliance and knowledge from the patient behind it. And I think she's an intelligent woman, that's what I've always thought, who can "do it" and get out of it, with math and everything, so whatever, it's good. And for someone who is perhaps not as well educated or has a bit of trouble with numbers, who is perhaps a foreigner or also has language barriers, it's not as easy as you might think and you can see that... so at Balgrist (hospital) I saw that with the diabetic feet, what they... They simply can't cope with it, but they also have too little external support, don't want to accept enough support and the consequences are devastating. So it's a very wide range, so there are a lot of possibilities, but a lot depends on you.
GA: Very well summarized. So beautiful. TN1, you were about to say something and we interrupted you.
TN1: So my husband has type 1 diabetes and he has this sensor and this progression is very challenging. And I see my husband, he always has to think, "Okay, what am I eating? What's my stress level? Can I exercise later?" Ehm, there are so many factors with diabetes and for me that was interesting to see my own curve and what an impression or influence can have. Ehm, when I get up, I'm under stress or I've been breastfeeding or what, I've eaten a banana and then I see that it's gone up like this. And that was a reason for me, I always have to (pause for thought), you have a greater perspective on the factors for blood sugar and also what the influences of inflammation from high blood sugar or high stress, the positive influence of exercise after eating or exercise before eating for example. Because we have this blood sugar in us, but we don't think about it, we go on and we do what we want.
(Nods of agreement and approving noises from the other participants)
GA: Fine.
TN6: Yes, I think because I've experienced it with patients, but also with friends, that it's simply a very big challenge when you have diabetes / that it's simply a very big challenge when you have diabetes to manage your blood sugar because it's simply a very complex cycle that depends on many things and you simply have to readjust it now. 
(TN2 enters the room slightly late and sits down quietly)
TN6: And ehm, you can see that some patients come here to have their blood sugar adjusted. They've had type 1 diabetes for a very long time, for years, and now all of a sudden for one or two years they've constantly had values over 20 and you don't know why, so you have to find a new approach somehow. So even if you've managed to find something good for yourself in one episode of your life, metabolic things may change over the course of your life. And while I have a friend who manages her blood sugar relatively well, always has relatively good values and compensates for this with sport, I have another friend, for example, who no longer likes going outside in summer because the heat always sends him into hypoglycemia somehow and he constantly has to eat something and then he doesn't even like doing sport outside anymore because he feels so physically unwell. And you can just see the limitations and ehm, yes, I think that's where you're directly confronted with the challenges for the patients. So yes, at my point, for example, I wouldn't have any good suggestions for people on how to do things better.
(GA briefly informs TN2 about the audio recording)
GA: We asked so briefly, you've probably also seen diabetes patients like that...
TN2: Yes, totally.
GA: And also probably patients, with a sensor or...?
TN2: But even with a sensor. I have the feeling that this is especially true for those with type 1 diabetes, because they have had it for much longer... so...
GA: ...section)
TN2: ...in the stage of life. Most type 2 diabetics don't have it until later in life and the type 1s, most of them at least, have lived with it since they were young. And I just think that having this sensor like this is important, because I also had some people at school, for example, who had type 1 diabetes, for whom it was unpleasant in the middle of the day to say: "Sorry, I have to go and get a prick because of my blood sugar". And that they simply no longer have this stigma and don't just say: "I have to step away from life for a moment to do this". Instead, the sensor just keeps running, so to speak. I mean, with the Freestyle 3, it's the direct connectivity, they don't even have to hold the phone to it anymore, I think they can participate in life instead of having to constantly step away because of something. I think it's just so cool for them.
GA: I'll probably start with you, TN6, and then we can go through it like this. You were very interested in wearing it yourself. Can you tell us what your experience was like from the beginning up to a fortnight? What stayed with you? What information and ehm, were there any problems?
TN6 (nods): Well, my interest actually came from having an insight into the body that you don't really have otherwise. So blood sugar levels are something you might measure once at the doctor's, you do HbA1c and for the settings, but otherwise I don't know what's going on in my body. And I've noticed myself when I'm under stress, when I'm having a hard day, I feel shaky and then I eat something and then I feel better and somehow that's where the interest came from: "Okay, what's actually going on with my blood sugar?" Then I also experienced relatively quickly that when I work in the emergency department and am stressed, even if I have eaten a lot, I have very low blood sugar levels, i.e. too low. And that made me realize that I need to eat even more to somehow compensate for this. At the same time, I also noticed that when I'm at home or on a quiet shift on the ward, for example, everything is actually relatively balanced. And it was very interesting to see the effect that stress or mental strain or physical strain has on this. Whereas physical stress wasn't so much in the foreground, because when I went for walks, it was still well balanced, so to see that the body can control it really well. And also to get a feeling for which foods have which influence, for example a very balanced meal with lots of protein actually caused a relatively stable curve and you felt very good, whereas a very carbohydrate-rich meal with almost exclusively carbohydrates caused big peaks. In the case of instant noodles, some of these peaks exceeded the normal values, which was very interesting to see.
GA: Those were Chinese noodles, weren't they?
TN6: Yes, those instant ramen noodles. It was interesting to see this effect and then also to see what patients are confronted with when I already have a supposedly healthy salivary gland. Ehm, problems that could result from this for me now are that, for example, I have seen very low blood values, I was already stressed on the emergency ward, but that is not a dangerous situation for me. That I'm not at risk of negative consequences from hypoglycemia because my body still has a different metabolic capacity. And that's where I perhaps see the limits of the whole thing, that you might underestimate the problems of people with diabetes if they have these values. So that's what struck me.
GA: You have the feeling that your consciousness has changed a bit in this direction? Can you say that?
TN6: Exactly. Or that's where I see the danger in tracking yourself and then seeing: "Ah, I'm still doing well," for example.
GA: Yes. How was it for you, TN3?
TN3: Yes, um. I actually just did it out of interest to have a go. It's fun and exciting to see what kind of values you have and then I'm, um, also clearly, I've also observed it a bit when you do sport, sometimes hiking, sometimes eating something. I'm then somehow, I'm also quite enthusiastic: "Now I've eaten something, now I'm holding it up (the cell phone to the sensor), now it's certainly mega high." And then I was a bit disillusioned, because somehow it was always just always within the normal range. At most 4.8, 4.7 from time to time / And then I was a bit disillusioned because it was always somehow just always within the normal range. At most 4.8, 4.7 now and then, even when I was hiking, when I had the feeling "Now I'm really hypoglycaemic, really dehydrated, hypoglycaemic", then I measured it and it was actually normal. And then you realize a bit: "Yes, of course it's normal, I have a functioning pancreas." I don't have a problem, so I might feel hypoglycaemic, but probably just like she (TN6) said, I'm not in any danger because my body can regulate my metabolism. And that is, yes, I have sometimes noticed that you stick to values and it's also kind of cool, but I think it can also put you under stress to always have to orientate yourself to a value. Also that colleague I was talking about earlier, she got depressed because she was so fixated on having a perfect HbA1c. So if you only focus on numbers and no longer pay attention to your physical well-being and "How am I doing?" and no longer listen to yourself and only listen to the value, like: "I have a bad value, I have to feel bad now...". So... (pause for thought), what I still experienced as a difficulty, and what I wouldn't have thought, was the night-time measurements. You explained that to us, three times a day, every 8 hours, no problem. I mean, I measured it much more than three times a day anyway, but then suddenly you wake up in the morning and: "Oh, it's more than eight hours!" So maybe you don't sleep for eight hours, but then you measure, so you realize: "Aha, I have to hold it right before I close my eyes and just when I get up I have to hold it." And otherwise you're no longer in the eight-hour range and it's so difficult. And then I had to set an alarm clock at the weekend so that I wouldn't forget, because otherwise... (Surprised noises from the other participants) Yes, but I can imagine that it's a challenge for patients to have the whole time management and the whole thing in their heads. Yes, exactly.
GA: And if you imagine, well, you didn't have any need, so this is out of interest: "Okay, is there an interruption?" If you forget, that's not good, so set an alarm clock, but it can have consequences for patients.
TN3: Exactly, it has consequences for them, so they certainly have a different motivation for doing it. But it's not that relevant for us.
GA: Yes, interesting. With you, TN2?
TN2: Yes, I found the study itself really interesting. Because, I mean, most freestyle studies are geared more towards diabetics, I mean, I think very few have been done on healthy subjects. Ehm, and just out of interest, which is what TN6 meant, if you adjust your food intake in this way. So if you eat the proteins first and then the carbohydrates, then I've already seen that the spike was flattened out afterwards, but then on the other hand there's a bit of a feeling of guilt because you know that you're going to eat the chip packet now, because you know that the spike will come straight away and it did. So that was exactly the expectation. And then I also found it really interesting that, because I had it the other way around with TN6, when I... my blood sugar always spiked when I was stressed. I was never, hardly ever, hypoglycemic. And I've also seen this, for example, with the circadian rhythm, so somehow at five o'clock in the morning, that the sugar went up so quickly and then I just felt so awake, but then I also felt awake. And then with a stressful situation, for example, I once had someone with TN1 on the ward where we thought she might have a bleed in her head. And I was actually still completely sober, but I noticed how stressed I was myself and then I happened to see in the app afterwards how my blood sugar went up and then down again with a bit of a time delay, even though I was still sober. It's also a bit like confirmation, like: "Yes, the job can be stressful from time to time." And that's the real-life correlation to it. Because I know myself, I was sober, so I hadn't eaten anything and the spike was actually supposed to happen when I ate, so it was probably the cortisol spike and that was the real-life correlation. And then it was like: "Yes, it was definitely more balanced at the weekend without duty." (laughs)
GA: So weekends are good for you as far as glucose metabolism is concerned at least. TN1, how were your 14 days with the sensor, what was your experience like? 
TN1: When I don't sleep so well, then in the morning the value is always high. I have observed which food makes it higher or lower and ehm, you hear the benefits of different foods and foods, oh you know, you have to eat banana or you have to eat yeast. But you see the individual response with different foods. I've always tried taking apple cider vinegar to control when I've had some high sugar and that has an effect. Or running a bit after carbohydrates with a meal, and that also had an effect.
GA: Did you have any problems with the sensor wear time? Did something go wrong or...?
TN1: No, no.
GA: Okay. With TN6, with you, was there anything where you intuitively didn't believe before the sensor that you would be able to achieve these insights? Was there anything or where you say, more or less, my intuition spoke against my intuition, that was something totally surprising?
TN6: Hmm... I was surprised by the results. Of course I expected that there would be fluctuations, but I didn't think that my stressful everyday life would bring me, i.e. my blood sugar, to my knees like that. And ehm, that even on a balanced day there are still curves that are still within the normal range, but are still relatively pronounced. Ehm... yes, even though I'm supposedly so healthy. And that I've also reflected on how unfortunately the job can sometimes be disruptive for the body. That was one value that we measured and it would be interesting to measure other values again that also respond to stress and so on. Yes, that was something I wasn't expecting.
GA: Yes. For you, TN3? Something surprising, something where you say, yes, I totally didn't expect that from this self-tracking?
TN3: No, so now I realize again, when she (TN6) says what kind of fluctuations she has, that it totally unsettles me, because I haven't had that. So it's like that again, like I said before, it's like a comparison. So you have the feeling, why is it now up with her and not with me, so that you somehow... yes, so that you just... that it's mega individual you notice even more through that, I think. And ehm, what I didn't expect either, it's described in such a super relaxed way: "Yes, no problem, you just do it there (points to your own upper arm) and then it doesn't bother you at all." But in the shower, when you get into the shower in the morning and you're so stressed out, I'm like "Wow!", so I've been a bit too roughly short. Or even when you're sleeping, you can still feel it a bit if you're lying on it the wrong way, so it bothers you a bit and I don't think you're aware of it beforehand.
GA: Yes, yes. With you, TN2?
TN2: I find that with the sensor, in terms of the values, I'm a bit surprised that it went up so often for me. Ehm, but also this other point that TN3 mentioned earlier. I mean, it's not actually invasive, we just have to remember to pick up the phone every eight hours. And even then, you forget a bit, because if you sleep for longer than eight hours, you're automatically over it.
GA: Yes.
TN2: Then I imagine what it was like in the past, when you didn't even have a Freestyle Libre and then you had to prick your finger all the time. So I was a bit bothered by those eight hours, but then with the: "Yes, what was it like in the past when you had to look for the device, prick your finger and hold on to it like that." That's a lot more effort, and you don't even realize beforehand how much effort it takes to simply have diabetes.
GA: Yes, and also the time involved, right. Getting the blood glucose meter out, and then preparing and ehm the whole thing. Nice. With you, TN1?
TN1: I also think that we ehm... (pause for thought). I don't know how to explain that in German. Can I say that in English? [Engl: It's when you wear the sensor it's a visible sign of your disease. And uhm, before, people see the sensor and they say "Oh, they have type 1 diabetes." And in the US people are wearing it more and more for this reason to just know the curve, to know the inflammation. So, it's not a sign of your diabetes, it's actually a sign of "I'm a very health conscious, very health literate person." For me, that was interesting. Because first I would always look at my husband and say, "Everyone knows he has Diabetes.," because everyone sees it's here (TN1 points to her arm) and then he used to put it here (TN1 points to her loin / lumbar region) for more privacy. And then I started wearing it and then people would say "Do you have Diabetes, do you have Diabetes?" and I said: "No, I'm doing a study." So, it's an interesting perspective].
TN1: (translated from English): When you wear the sensor, it's a visible sign of your disease. And before that, people see the sensor and say, "Oh, you have type 1 diabetes." And in the US, people are wearing it more and more for that reason, just to know the curve, to know the inflammation. So, it's not a sign of diabetes, it's actually a sign of "I'm a very health-conscious, very health-educated person." For me, that was interesting. Because before, I always looked at my husband and said, "Everyone knows he has diabetes." Because everybody sees that he's here (TN1 points to her arm) and then he put it here (TN1 points to her loin/loin area) for more privacy. And then I started wearing it and then people were like, "Do you have diabetes, do you have diabetes?" And I said, "No, I'm doing a study." So it's an interesting perspective.
GA: Very good.
TN3: Yes, I think a resident saw that I had this and thought: "You know, TN3, this is the first really sexy medical device that you can wear. Because it shows that you're... Yeah, it's just cool, you're tracking yourself." And I was like, "Huh?" So I couldn't relate to it at all, but obviously, like TN1 said, it's more and more something that people are using that describes you as a person who's interested in their health.
GA: Yes, it's interesting that this change has also taken place, at least in certain countries. Switzerland will probably join in later, but we don't know.
TN1: In America there's a waiting list for this um, app called Levels. And Levels measures the blood sugar curve and says, "Oh, you have inflammation from these high levels." And everybody's waiting for Levels and they buy it and it's like a status symbol that you think about it.
GA: Are there already studies there, about these people who carry themselves...?
TN1: Mhm, yes. They are in studies.
TN3: But that's kind of stupid, isn't it? So reducing your health to your blood sugar level is the epitome of a person who is intelligent enough to inform themselves and gather so much information from everywhere but then feel that: "If I'm wearing this, then I'm doing myself just the right thing". I mean, if everyone was smart enough, become an endocrinologist, I mean it's so complex, there's so much more to it than just a blood sugar reading.
GA: You said it so well, because in the end it's still integrative information about health. The problem is, it's only fractions that are available to us. Like TN1 says, we don't even know what our blood sugar is without measuring it. Especially if someone has diabetes. Of course, with good regulation like yours (TN3), you don't even need to know because it will be good. But very probably not in diabetic patients. If you could tell me now, okay now we're putting ourselves in the shoes of patients, what benefits could this technology bring? From your point of view, for example, TN6?
TN6: The advantage, at least as I perceived it, is of course the wearing comfort. It holds firmly, it's somehow weatherproof, water-resistant, you don't have to restrict yourself too much, you can even go to the sauna. So first of all, as far as the sensor is concerned, you can do everything you need during the day. Of course, you have to take less material with you, you don't have to prick yourself, make sure it's... so it's also kind of hygienically sealed. It lasts for two weeks, which is relatively good to start with, and of course it's super easy to use. So you don't have to attend a big training course, do you? Even you, Gurpreet, showed me how to do it once and then it was easy. Or you just have to hold your cell phone up to it. Ehm, yes, the limitation is of course if the cell phone doesn't work, if the cell phone isn't there, you can't measure your blood sugar level. If there is a malfunction in the device, which can certainly happen from time to time, then you can't measure your blood glucose directly, so you would have to resort to other things. And yes, there is certainly also the problem that it might also be uncomfortable and you feel identified as someone with an illness. But otherwise I have to say, I actually see quite few disadvantages there, so yes.
GA: What do you, TN3, see as the benefits for patients to adopt and continue to use such technology for management?
TN3: Yes, certainly everything she said. Well, I said earlier that it's a bit uncomfortable, but I think it's very convenient overall and a good device. Ehm, and the other advantage for patients is of course that your diabetologist has a much better overview of what your values are. Otherwise you can somehow say: "Yes, everything's fine." And of course, you always have the HbA1c, but still, with a device, just like she (TN2) said, the new one always measures and the pumps always measure. And you also have the nice curves where you can see exactly how an individual responds to how much insulin, so you have the chance to achieve much better long-term sugar with a device.
GA: Great, very nice. For you (TN2)?
TN2: I can imagine, especially when... very, very young type 1 diabetics... When children have this, I mean, it's a lot of effort for parents. And especially I think in the USA, some of them have such a link with the insulin pumps that it is then automatically linked to the app in order to achieve such a level. I think that's also a lot easier for the parents, instead of telling the children: "This is how finger pricking works and now you have to inject so and so much." Instead, it's a bit more of a... It's just going on all the time, as long as there's no system error. I think that's also more relieving for the parents.
GA: An app like that, which is semi-automatic, so that they don't have to worry so much. Yes, and for you (TN1)?
TN1: I think that's an advantage when you see the information in a curve, not in discrete data points. Because afterwards you always have to do that and ehm, you forget this curve. You just see this number and ehm, health is like a curve and you have to integrate so many factors and you see that with this device that it shows a... not just a point, that's a story. 
GA: There is a before and after.
TN1: Yes, yes.
TN6: And one thing I can perhaps add is that there is another thing that we have also described, which is simply to see exactly which diet influences blood sugar and how. So to see that on the basis of a curve and also certain lifestyle decisions and stress and the job, you can see that much more clearly on the basis of several values and not just points. And I think it's very valuable to adjust a little bit and see that you have a more balanced blood sugar level.
(Everyone nods in agreement, or makes noises of agreement)
TN3: And depending on that, it also warns you if you get into hyperglycemia, I mean, in the past you might have just suddenly been lying somewhere and nobody found you and now you are warned by the device. I think that's certainly a great relief. 
GA: There is probably also courage to lower high values because you have a bit of security. I don't know if that could be a factor...
TN3: So how...?
GA: You can understand a patient's fear, can't you, of hypoglycemia? And even more so if you can't see the values. And with the sensor you can see the values, then you can probably see better.
TN3: Yes, definitely.
GA: So now you've actually recognized glucose metabolism for a bit longer, 14 days. And now, if a patient comes in with diabetes and he doesn't have a sensor. Would you perceive this patient differently and approach them differently or has nothing really changed much with the sensor?
TN6: So the question was whether patients who now have small sensors should be looked at differently?
GA: Yes.
TN6: Well, I just think that dealing with the subject of blood glucose yourself naturally heightens your awareness of what are normal blood glucose values and what are not, and of course when I see someone's diary I can also think my way back into the curve that I saw on the Freestyle Libre and then draw my conclusions. Is the person doing well or not? 
GA: Beautiful!
TN6: I think I'm honestly much more interested in it now. So before, blood sugar was always something like: "Oh, now the person also has diabetes, now I have to cover that somehow." And you were always happy if the person had a good regimen that worked well, then you might have injected a bit more as the disease progressed, but then it worked. And to be honest, when patients came in who... where it was always exacerbated, you were a bit like: "Oh, now you have to take care of it." But now that I've done it myself, I've actually got to the point where I'm really, really interested in it and really want to look at it with the patients and identify what might be there. So regardless of whether they have a sensor or not, that had the effect on me at least.
GA: Yes, fine. With you (TN3)?
TN3: I don't think I quite understand the question...
GA: So, the question is: We have our own understanding of a disease through the books we have read, or: "This disease means this." You don't have this disease and you've seen your glucose regulation with the sensor, ehm and if you think, okay, what would such a curve look like in a patient with diabetes, you can probably imagine that the fluctuations are greater than they were in your case. Can you now see the patient with diabetes sitting next to you, can you see him or will you see him differently? Your awareness of a potential patient with diabetes has changed so that you don't just see them as someone with diabetes, but also as a person behind them who can make mistakes, who could have problems with scanning, then forget it, if they don't have a sensor they will probably measure once, ignore once, inject insulin once, not inject once. That you would register the patient a little differently as a human being?
TN3: Yes. So I mean, point: "Why don't they have a sensor?" You can say: "Huh, it's so simple, it would make your life so much easier, why wouldn't they want that?" I think I've always been able to understand that, because I think it's just a huge burden for many people, and it's like, you're confronted with this disease all the time and you're confronted with the fact that your values are crap all the time. And, I'm sorry to put it like this, but it must also be a psychological burden, depending on how resilient you are / because I think it's just a huge burden for many people, and it's like, you're confronted with this illness all the time and you're confronted with the fact that your values are shit all the time. And, sorry to put it this way, but it must also be a psychological burden, depending on how resilient you are. And somehow, purely on the basis of this study, I don't think I necessarily need more.... Of course, I've had an insight into what it's like myself, but I don't have the feeling that I can understand it any more. I think, just with my studies, with the medical profession, but also, I was on the rotation at Balgrist, lots of diabetes patients... of course, you get more and more insight into the fact that it's a challenge, or also in the environment, but...
GA: Yes, yes. With you, TN2?
TN2: Yes, well, I mean, we were confronted with the fact that we were constantly looking at our blood sugar levels and I mean, with myself I was constantly thinking "Wow, if I'm under stress all the time, my HbA1c would probably have gone up somehow over this time if I was stressed 80% of the time." (everyone laughs) And that's why I just think to myself: "Yes, I totally understand that diabetics... I mean, that a disease like this somehow takes up so much of their lives." Somehow that understanding is also there now, I mean, you know beforehand that diabetes is not a nice disease if you can't control it well. And for some people, it's really difficult to control their blood sugar levels if they need triple therapy and still have a bad HbA1c... And when I imagine that they're confronted with it all the time, at some point they really get problems with polyneuropathy, and then they don't even notice that they're becoming hypoglycaemic. I mean, in my case with the stress phases where it goes so high, but for them it's like, "I eat this now and then my blood sugar goes so high", it's no longer controllable. So the understanding is then on a different level.
GA: TN1, with you?
TN1: Ehm, I also think for younger people it's so easy, so convenient (= practical), it's not so strenuous to use. But for older people, maybe, they don't like it with a device... well, they are dependent on a device, they always have to be in contact with a device and these older people, they don't like smartphones or it's also a foreign presence in their lives. And that's also different, it's a different philosophy than we have. 
GA: That means you have to work individually... 
TN1: ...decide.
GA: ... to see with the patient what his needs and wishes are and what he is prepared to participate in? Yes.
TN3: Yes, or simply recognizing that a patient will never have good values. So we tried again and again and again and he ... he just can't get it right. You can support him with Spitex or whatever, but... Well, not everyone will have an HbA1c that's perfect. 
GA: And even on their own, the doctors are also confronted with the fact that they have to realize that they can't get all patients well adjusted if the patient himself doesn't work in the team and isn't there. Because he probably does the main work and we are only there as coaches and whatever to support him. Ehm, is there something, TN6, where you say, okay, for that I can also recommend others to wear a sensor themselves, because that has helped me in this respect. Or for that I would say, no, save yourselves this sensor?
TN6: That means especially people who have diabetes? Yes, I have to think about that because I recommended it to my little sister. My little sister has PCOS and has put on a lot of weight, which has improved with hormone therapy. However, we have already talked to her doctor about possibly starting Fomin, because she has glucose sensitivity, but it doesn't fit the definition of diabetes or anything else. She has now managed to change her diet a lot and everything is much better now. I think it would be really interesting for her to see how her blood sugar responds to physical activity, stress and certain foods in the daily curve. Precisely because she has changed her diet so that she no longer gets such high spikes. So I think that if you're familiar with it, it might help from this point of view. And I also think that athletes might be interested to know when they are running their ultramarathon when they need to eat something in order to have the perfect level. That might also make sense. But then, for someone who doesn't have a certain level of fitness, I think I would be reluctant to recommend that, because putting the values in context perhaps also requires a certain understanding of the body and a certain calmness, that just because you sometimes have high values and sometimes have low values, that's not a bad thing. So I think that the risk of developing a kind of hypochondriac with your blood sugar is too high and also because it might not necessarily have a benefit for you. So... yes.
GA: For you, TN3, what would you recommend to others and what would you say "Yes, not really" for?
TN3: Yes... (pause for thought). Well, my sister does very ambitious mountain marathons and ultramarathons and so on. And she, well, she wanted to do that once and I told her "Yes, sure, you can try it out with a sensor like that." But of course she also sees all her fellow athletes doing it. But otherwise I don't think I would recommend it either, because if there is no indication for it, because (pause for thought) it takes more than just knowing which values are normal values to understand the blood sugar. So I don't think even I understand it the way I would like to understand it. From that point of view, no, I wouldn't.
GA: Yes. With you, TN2?
TN2: I don't think I would recommend it to the average person who doesn't have any pre-existing conditions, because they just don't understand it. And I think you can get obsessed very quickly and I can imagine people who have a tendency towards orthorexia and eating disorders that it could have a negative impact. (All agree) The only thing I could perhaps think about is people who are pre-diabetic somehow because of lifestyle changes, who don't quite know that this might be indicative for two weeks, just that they see "Oh, the meals don't work at all, then my blood sugar somehow goes to 12 or whatever". Somehow it might be a trial for them, but even then I would be cautious, because I think, as I said, they don't have the background to know how to interpret the values. Maybe just as a maximum to know "Oh, I totally react to these things with an extreme blood sugar spike", so that you then know that you should perhaps reduce them a little. Because everyone reacts a bit individually to foods that cause a high blood sugar spike, but even then I would be cautious. So for a lifestyle change...
TN1: I realize that too, you can get fixated. (Pause for thought) You can also have a competition with yourself and that's also dangerous, it's for no reason. I also realized that I was eating yeast for a reason, I wanted to stimulate my milk production. And then I saw that it was so high and then I thought, "Oh, I shouldn't eat yeast." And that doesn't make sense. There are just pros and cons and sometimes, you know, you see an elevated blood sugar with different foods. But that doesn't mean you should never eat yeast or you know... It depends. And you have to have that perspective. 
GA: Now, we are slowly coming to the end. TN6, how comfortable would you feel in the future with a patient with a sensor in hospital if the patient is currently under your care? How comfortable and confident would you feel caring for him and probably also supporting him if he had any problems with the sensor?
TN6: I would feel comfortable, in the sense that if I had the patient in front of me now and we were talking about diabetes, I would immediately be interested in him showing me the cell phone and that I could take a look at what it looks like.
GA: Yes, nice!
TN6: Then I could say directly: "Ah, I used to have that too." And then you have a direct connection to the patient, that's also what's fun about treating patients, when you can create a connection that goes beyond talking about how ill this person is or what you need to do now. So I'm always happy when you have something that connects you. Yes, and I would be even more motivated to ask what problems there are, simply because I've always looked at that myself. To what extent I'm capable of dealing with his problems is another matter, but yes ...
(While TN6 was answering, TN1 had to leave the room, her cell phone rang. She did not come back during the conversation)
GA: So you'll be better at making contact?
TN6: Yes, definitely.
GA: With you, TN3?
TN3: Yes, probably above all the point, ehm, that you can take the patient's cell phone and have a look at it. I don't think I was aware of that before, so I think I would have known somehow, but just not so actively and now I'm much more aware of it and you look at it much more. And it's actually a lot of information that you get there.
GA: So beautiful! Yes. With you, TN2?
TN2: Also what TN6 and TN3 said, simply that you have a bit of a connection with the patient and can also build it up, so yes, I know what it's like to have worn one of these things. And then you can also simply correlate what the patient says with their values directly on their cell phone: "Yes, okay, good, it fits."
GA: Chiara, do you have any additional questions that I forgot to ask?
CA: Yes, I find the relationship exciting. So you also think that it's well received from the patient's perspective when treating physicians can say: "I've tried this too." Or when you talk about a device, if you can say: "I've had that experience too?" Do you see this more positively from the patient's perspective or does it not play such a role because they have an idea of the content without self-experience (i.e. the doctors)?
TN3: I think if I were a patient who was now confronted with a metabolic disease, i.e. a new diagnosis, and the doctor said to me: "I can understand you or you can understand me, I've already worn the device", then I think I would feel a bit stupid. Because somehow, you may have worn the device, but you don't have the disease, so that's another two fundamental differences. Sure, it's great in itself that someone can tell you first-hand what it felt like with the device, / Sure, it's great in itself that someone can tell you first-hand what it felt like with the device, but the connection you share is very limited.
GA: Yes, yes.
CA: I can see that point, yes.
GA: Is there anything we have forgotten to ask where you say, yes, this information is probably also relevant to your studies, probably important to tell us?
TN6: Perhaps I've just thought of an addition to the question of which people should perhaps wear this.
GA: Yes!
TN6: I mean, we did the self-experiment with ourselves as doctors and if we say that it has helped us, it would of course be a suggestion that other people try it out when treating such patients. But on the other hand, it occurred to me that it's also interesting, for example, when parents have children, small children, and they are very involved in seeing what the child is like. For them, of course, to see "how does it compare with me?" so that's another group I can think of where it makes sense. Or in partnerships, if you're involved as a partner, you're also always involved if you have a partner with diabetes, that it's still interesting for them. That's the only thing I wanted to add. But no other questions really.
GA: Great. And is there a possibility that other colleagues have also asked you, everyone knows that you are taking part in the study, have they asked you what your experience has been so far with wearing the sensor?
TN6: Well, I think the exchange was primarily with the colleagues who had it. Although of course, I was on the emergency ward, where I picked it up fresh and of course everyone immediately asked: "How is it now?" And because they were of course so low (the values), everyone wanted to know: "Has the value gone up now, really?" And so on. But in that sense, there was an interest and also a kind of fascination that you could measure a healthy person like that. 
GA: Great! Any other additions? 
(Silence, shaking head)
GA. Then I would say thank you very much. Now we would turn it off.

