Reflections
Reflection TN1
(in addition to the interview, as TN1 had to leave earlier, as noted in the transcript)
What I appreciated about the sensor study was the ability to analyze the body's reaction to subtle influencing factors to blood sugar regulation: sleep, stress, exercising before or after eating, emotional regulation. One had satisfaction in being able to see the curve go downwards... One had satisfaction in a good morning fasting value.
However, I did feel that I did not like how public it was... I did not like that people saw the sensor and were "judging" if I were diabetic. It is not a silent disease anymore and sometimes we need privacy and discretion with our medical diseases.
I also think one can go overboard with it... one can sometimes think Lower is always better even if that is absolutely not true! Lower is not better when it comes to hypoglycemia. It is more about appreciating the return to normal or the steady curve rather than lower is better.
Even though it was easy for me and practical for us, I do wonder if some people will like the traditional fingerstick method (more private, not technologically driven).
Reflection of TN8
Wearing a glucose sensor for two weeks was an exciting experience that revealed problems previously unknown to me in diabetes patients. Until now, I was of the opinion that the Freestyle Libre was a simple, almost obligatory glucose monitor for every diabetes patient. Even though the traceability of one's own blood glucose values is indeed simple and quite comprehensive, I was surprised by the sensor's susceptibility to errors ("hypoglycemia" at night with muscle compression), as well as the "vulnerability" of the sensor in everyday situations such as drying off after showering or sitting on a bench. I lost the sensor three times during the two-week wearing period (once shortly after putting it on).
Keeping to the maximum eight-hour scanning interval also proved to be more challenging than expected. The announced introduction of automatic scanning via Bluetooth is certainly a useful update.
I am generally a big fan of self-experience, as I believe it promotes understanding for patients. Accordingly, I would also support the introduction of such an opportunity for trainee doctors.
Reflection from TN23
I found the experiment very exciting as I have often wondered how high my blood sugar is and how my diet affects it. I was very intrigued at first and scanned very often to see what was influencing everything and how quickly my blood sugar was changing. Over time I got used to it and only scanned before and after a meal. It was reassuring to see how narrow the range of my level was, even after very high sugar meals. It made me think about how limiting it must be not to be able to rely on this physiological regulation. Nevertheless, I like how easy it has become to measure my BG. I didn't actually find the sensor itself restrictive, but I had to remember to take my clothes off more carefully and I bumped into it more often. Unfortunately, my sensor failed after just one week after I reacted to the adhesive. It was very itchy, so I was almost glad when it fell out. I then asked myself whether there are alternatives for people with atopic dermatitis, for example, so that they can access the sensors despite having easily reactive skin. I think you get used to wearing them over time, but I'm glad I don't have to. The picture of a diabetic patient and the necessary measures for successful therapy become much clearer when you wear the sensor, but I saw it from a more scientific point of view and therefore I didn't fully empathize with the perspective. I don't know how useful this experiment would be for any doctor, as you can certainly just wear it without worrying about it, as you don't really have to take nutrition into consideration if the regulation is working. Perhaps it would make more of an impression if you had to note and consider the exact intake of carbohydrates. All in all, it was an exciting experience that I would do again at any time, with the hope that I will never have to rely on such a sensor myself.
Reflection Prof. Ludwig T. Heuss
Nowadays, we monitor ourselves around the clock and, above all, with our watches: wearables everywhere. The self-measurement of people has become an attribute of modernity or perhaps also a symbol of maintaining the illusion in an increasingly insecure world that we can do something, that we can control ourselves.
I admit it, I too have become a controller of myself. I measure my step count, blood pressure, sleep every day and, above all, my weight. My weight is my enemy, which I have been wrestling with for decades and which is a constant source of pain. But in the last few months I have changed direction! It's a pleasure to reveal that I've been using Mounjaro once a week since August and the weight is melting away - at least so far.
So let me say these two things up front: 1. I myself have succumbed to the fetish of self-measurement and 2. I use a GLP-1, nota bene a diabetes medication for food reduction and weight loss.
I used a glucose sensor twice: once from September 19 to 26 and once from October 23 to November 6. The reason for the double period was that on September 26 I got my arm caught on the door frame on my way to the bathroom in the morning and accidentally tore off the sensor. That was quite a realization: the sensor is practically imperceptible. I had actually expected a little pain, but didn't feel anything. Sometimes it felt like a slight muscle ache, but you only really remembered the sensor when you touched your own arm and felt something hard - or when you touched the door frame lost in thought and accidentally tore it off. You could also simply forget about it in the shower. That was a good feeling. Previously, when I saw young diabetics with a glucose sensor, I always felt a bit sorry for them and thought that it must hurt to live with such a needle in your skin.
I'm sure people around me thought the same. A sensor on the arm is a stigma. Some saw the sensor or watched me download the results and looked pityingly. "Oh, poor Ludwig, he's got it now too... He has diabetes..." When I then explained that no, this was a self-observation study, I received a mixture of admiration for the heroic self-experiment (it really didn't hurt) and skepticism as to what I could find out.
You can learn a lot with such a sensor in your arm. First of all: how constant blood sugar is in healthy people. My values were practically always within the normal range. During the September measurement, they even tended to be slightly higher than in October. I noticed how little the feeling of low blood sugar correlates with hunger. The idea that "I am hypoglycemic" is only true to a very limited extent. In any case, I found it extremely difficult to get a feeling for my own blood sugar. If I hadn't eaten for a long time, I could assume that my blood sugar was rather low. But I didn't really feel it. I found it impressive to observe my blood sugar for the first time after eating a pizza over lunch. It shot up from under 6 to almost 9 mmol/l. But I didn't really feel anything from this either. An unexpected learning point: on October 23, at the beginning of the second measurement, I had also eaten very little during the day and in the evening I went to Heilbronn in Germany to give a lecture. After the lecture, it got late: we went to a winery at around 10 pm and ate (a little) and tasted (a lot) all the different wines that were in the repertoire. It was around 01.30 the next morning before I got up and went to bed. When I read my blood sugar, I noticed that I had probably dropped below 3.4 mmol in the early hours of the morning. Apparently the liver was unable to adequately utilize the many calories, or the combination with the GLP-1 led to a rather low blood sugar, below the threshold.
Apart from this event, 99% of my BG value was within the target range, the average of the last 30 days was 5.0 mmol/l, there was never an upward outlier. This also gave me an estimated HbA1c value of 5.0%, which was rather reassuring in terms of my self-measurement.
Wearing the glucose sensor was a special experience. I learned how little I subjectively feel the level of my blood sugar and how quickly and with what delay changes in blood sugar can be measured. I was amazed at the consistency of the regulation and how easy, painless and unproblematic it is to use a sensor. Compared to diabetes patients, this has significantly increased my understanding of the mechanisms of continuous self-monitoring.

